C H A P T E R 17
Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property


INTRODUCTION
.......................................................................

Intellectual property rights (IPRs) are increasingly becoming an extremely important asset of any large corporation, whether in the United States or in other countries. In today’s global economy, IPRs are critical to a company’s ability to compete effectively, and they are often a key reason behind a company’s dominance in the marketplace. It is no surprise then, that IPRs are central to various intercorporate transactions including mergers and acquisitions, licensing, and cross-licensing. In fact, because large corporations have universally recognized the need to build strong IPR portfolios, cross-licensing agreements are prolifer-ating and are becoming a routine part of business operations.

Innovation and intellectual property have been recognized as a central driver for growth as well as stock market value. As market capitalization and the global economy have moved from a manufacturing-based to a knowledge-based economy, the type of assets on companies’ balance sheets has significantly shifted from tangible assets to intangible assets (which include IPRs). For instance, Research in Motion’s BlackBerry patents have been estimated to contribute more than 20 percent to its share value, although the value may be declining due to increased competition from Apple, Samsung, and others.

As a result, companies are racing to build substantial intellectual property portfolios to maintain a strong position in the marketplace and to improve their bottom line and share value. In 2011, a consortium including Microsoft, Apple, Ericsson, Research in Motion, and others paid $4.5 billion for 6,000 patents owned by bankrupt Nortel Networks. Google purchased Motorola Mobility for $12.5 billion and acquired Motorola’s 17,000 patents in that transaction.

IPRs give their owners a monopoly within the four corners of the IPRs: the literal meaning stated in the granted IPR. If a company owns an IPR, it can bring

460


lawsuits to prevent others from competing with products with features that fall within the literal bounds of the legal description of the IPR. The international marketplace is thus increasingly driven by IPR litigation. Companies secure intellectual property rights to ensure freedom to operate in their IP space, to preempt litigation, and to strengthen their bargaining position against competitors. For instance, in a crowded technology space, a company can defend itself in litigation by countersuing and asserting its own patents against a competitor. In addition, armed with a strong intellectual property portfolio, compa-nies are in a better position to negotiate favorable terms in a licensing or cross-licensing agreement to obtain use of another company’s IPR.

Emerging countries are quickly catching up on IPR-driven growth strategies. China was the world’s second largest research-and-development spender in 2009. Further, a Chinese telecommunications company, ZTE Corporation, was the biggest filer of international patent applications in 2011. Another Chinese company, Huawei Technologies, ranked third.

While this global race to build IPR portfolios has promoted innovation and growth, in certain crowded fields, it has also resulted in global IP wars, such as the multinational Apple/Samsung litigation. This wealth of litigation sometimes paradoxically results in the inefficient underuse of IP resources, a situation in which too many patent owners are excluding each other, and as a result, no one can effectively use the invention. Licensing or cross-licensing arrangements solve or lessen these inefficiencies and should be considered and used early in any potential transaction or dispute.

This chapter analyzes how IPRs affect companies’ behavior, strategies, and interrelations, including litigation and licensing arrangements between private parties. In addition, the chapter will examine the various IPR protection and enforcement laws and treaties and how governments attempt to promote innovation, development, and trade through


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	461




these laws and treaties. Finally, the chapter will discuss practical limitations on the protection and enforcement of IPRs, including historical attitudes towards IPRs, social considerations, and ethical issues.


LITIGATION
.......................................................................

If a company can gain a monopoly by defining its IPR broadly, there is a great incentive to broad patents. And the government authorities with the power of granting patents are extremely busy and do not have the resources of those seeking the patents. For example, in late 2012, Apple obtained a U.S. design patent on a computer in the shape of a triangle with rounded cor-ners. That may mean that no other computer manufac-turer can make a computer of a similar shape unless Apple consents. Whatever one might say about the pol-icy merits of granting a company a monopoly on such a common shape, if successful, the patent holder would be able to exclude competitors from entering the com-puter tablet market, irrespective of whether the con-tents and quality of the tablet are entirely different. If the courts uphold this patent, Apple would dominate the tablet market. The same incentive exists for all companies, in virtually all fields: Companies can fore-close competition, irrespective of quality or price, sim-ply by “owning” some attribute essential to the product. Thus, it is not surprising that virtually every technological field is now crowded with similarly broadly worded patents.

In the current IPR-crowded environment, litigation has become unavoidable, particularly in profitable industries dominated by one or more market leaders. A company with a strong IPR portfolio can refuse to license its IPR and can threaten or pursue litigation,




which can result in significant litigation expenses and potential market hold-up. This situation is highlighted, for instance, in the ongoing smartphone wars that are pitting the smartphone tech giants against each other in multinational disputes. Apple is spending millions of dollars in litigation expenses in several countries and continents, against multiple mobile-device manufacturers including Samsung, Motorola Mobility, and HTC.

One of the issues being litigated involves Apple’s patent covering the “bounce-back effect” in iOS, Apple’s operating system for iPhones and iPads. Apple claims that Google’s operating system Android and Android-equipped mobile devices infringe Apple’s “bounce-back” patent. Apple’s offensive litigation strategy, however, has prompted its rivals to retaliate in kind. For every allegation of patent infringement, Apple has to face allegations that Apple’s patent is invalid and counter-claims for infringement of the competitor’s own patents.

In litigation, an IPR owner plaintiff typically asserts infringement of one or more IPRs by products sold or manufactured by the accused infringer. The accused infringer can assert defenses of non-infringement, invalidity, and/or unenforceability. In addition, the accused infringer can counterclaim and assert the accused infringer’s own IPRs against the plaintiff. In the United States, federal district courts have exclusive jurisdiction over patent cases. And because, like all trials, patent trials involve resolution of issues of fact, juries often decide these cases. All appeals in patent cases are heard by the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which sits in Washington, DC. An unsatisfied patent litigant can further appeal decisions from the Federal Circuit to the Supreme Court of the United States, but such appeals are discretionary and the Supreme Court hears very few patent cases.



Apple, Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.

—— F. Supp. 2d —— (2013) WL 772525 (N.D. Cal.)


BACKGROUND

In August 2012, a jury awarded Apple more than $1 billion in damages for infringement against Samsung. Samsung filed a motion with the court for reduction of the jury award and for a new trial, and Apple filed a motion for supplemental damages.

JUDGE LUCY H. KOH

Apple’s motion for an increase in the jury’s damages award is DENIED. The Court declines to determine the amount of prejudgment interest or supplemental damages until after the appeals in this case are resolved.

continues




Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

462Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




continued



Because the Court has identified an impermissible legal theory on which the jury based its award, and cannot reasonably calculate the amount of excess while effectuating the intent of the jury, the Court hereby ORDERS a new trial on damages for the following products: Galaxy Prevail, Gem, Indulge, Infuse 4G, Galaxy SII AT&T, Captivate, Continuum, Droid Charge, Epic 4G, Exhibit 4G, Galaxy Tab, Nexus S 4G, Replenish, and Transform. This amounts to $450,514,650 being stricken from the jury’s award. The parties are encouraged to seek appellate review of this Order before any new trial.

The jury’s award stands for the Galaxy Ace, Galaxy S (i9000), Galaxy S II i9100, Galaxy Tab 10.1 WiFi,

Galaxy Tab 10.1 4G LTE, Intercept, Fascinate, Galaxy S 4G, Galaxy S II Showcase, Mesmerize, Vibrant, Galaxy S II Skyrocket, Galaxy S II Epic 4G Touch, and Galaxy S

AIT–Mobile. The total award for these 14 products is $598,908,892.

It is so ordered.

Case Questions

1.Should patent cases be decided by lay judges and juries?

2.Are litigation damages too high in patent cases?

3.How can the legislature improve the patent system and reduce the inefficiencies of litigation?



Certain courts have imposed mandatory licensing for patented technologies that are essential to the implementation of a standard. For example, in 2011, the Hague District Court in the Netherlands denied Samsung’s request for an injunction against Apple in connection with patents essential to comply with the 3G telecommunications standard. Samsung was required to give a license to Apple on fair, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory (FRAND) terms before seeking injunctive relief. FRAND licensing can significantly reduce the risk of patent hold -up and the perceived advantages of litigation, e.g., keeping competitors out of the marketplace. Unfortunately, FRAND licensing applies only in limited circum-stances and has not curbed litigation in a meaningful way. Because companies are learning that litigation is costly and risky, however, the free market may itself correct the inefficiencies of litigation by deterring parties from litigating and pushing them to enter in licensing and/or cross-licensing arrangements.

REASONS FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY TRANSFER ARRANGEMENTS
.......................................................................

The most rapidly growing method of doing business abroad is to transfer intellectual property rights (IPRs) to a foreign business in exchange for a fee or other form of remuneration. Intellectual property rights are rights to technological know-how or artistic work. Like the simple engagement of a representative discussed in the preceding chapter, IPR transfers need



not involve any capital investment abroad. They usu-ally involve manufacturing or merchandising a product or service in the foreign country. By engaging a foreign party to do this manufacturing or merchandising, the U.S. investor can avoid the substantial risks and legal entanglements of capital investments abroad, discussed in chapters to follow.

Owners of IPRs transfer them for a variety of reasons. The U.S. firm might grant a license for a fee— such a license fee is called a royalty—to a foreign company. A license is a limited permission to use the U.S. firm’s trademarks, copyrights, or know- how in making products for sale in the vicinity of the foreign company’s country. Alternatively, the U.S. company might provide the IPR and physical components to a foreign manufacturing plant that will fabricate the product for re-export back to the U.S. concern.

In many cases, the foreign product is itself a component of the U.S. company’s ultimate product. Upon receipt, the U.S. company will integrate it into the ultimate product in the United States. In addition, a U.S. firm can use a transfer of technology as its contribution to a joint venture abroad in exchange for a share of the joint venture. The joint venture would use the technology to manufacture and, perhaps, market the product.

A U.S. company typically enters into one of these arrangements because it provides marketing or other opportunities that the firm otherwise could not exploit efficiently. The firm may already be producing at the full extent of its domestic manufacturing capacity and may not have the resources to expand significantly. Licensing or teaming with a foreign company with adequate capital and perhaps other attractive


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	463




assets—for instance, a ready marketing network in desired export markets—is a way to expand the company’s market without raising substantial addi-tional capital.

Another U.S. firm may have ample funds and a good product, but an inadequate research and development (R&D) capability. If it needs to improve its technology quickly before it is nudged out of market share by competing technologies, such a company may wish to team with a foreign company that has strong R&D infrastructure in order to expand to new geographic markets in the short term, while developing enhanced products for the future.

Still another company may possess a utility patent (one that has a broad range of potential applications), but lack the breadth of management capabilities, developmental resources, or marketing skills to exploit all its applications simultaneously. After such a company reserves for itself the patent applications that seem most consistent with its skills and orienta-tion, the company might license the basic technology to other firms, each of which is authorized to develop a specified product or geographic market.

If labor is substantially cheaper in a foreign country, it may entice an IPR owner to shift production offshore. The U.S. company, however, may not know its way around the foreign country or may fear the risk of nationalization. In such a situation, the U.S. firm might prefer contracting with a local firm for its production requirements, rather than setting up its own factory abroad.

Companies also enter into licensing or cross-licensing arrangements to expand their business operations and gain access to new product lines. For instance, in 2013 Syngenta and DuPont recently entered into a technology licensing agreement that will expand each of the companies’ crop protection product portfolios. Under the agreement, Syngenta obtained a license from DuPont to develop products containing DuPont’s fungicide oxathiapiprolin. In exchange, DuPont received exclusive access to Syngenta’s Solatenol product for mixture with DuPont’s picoxystrobin fungicide on soybean and other crops in Brazil. Companies may also enter into licensing or cross-licensing arrangements to share initial costs, which can present barriers to entry into a new market, and maintenance costs. For instance, Nokia Siemens Networks agreed with Ericsson and Huawei in 2013 to enter into cross-licensing agreements for multi-vendor network management and to jointly utilize the Operations Support Systems (OSS) that they use to manage networks.



In short, there are many reasons for an IPR owner to transfer its intellectual property. Regardless of the motivation for a transfer, the risk is the same—losing control of the IPRs and helping to establish a competitor. For example, a small U.S. chemical manufacturer may provide its basic patent to a large French manufacturer through a joint venture in the hope of exploiting the European market and obtaining added R&D capacity. But in doing so, it may give the powerful foreign firm an opportunity to “research around” the patent and develop non-infringing alternatives, or other products whose infringement cannot be proved. With such products, the French firm may come to dominate the European market, as well as pose a threat in the U.S. firm’s own home market.

IPR transfers are becoming so common that numerous firms are emerging to facilitate transactions between IPR owners and potential purchasers. These include (1) IPR clearinghouses, which provide IPR strategy advice, valuation, infringement analysis;

(2)IPR brokers which handle IPR auctions and brokerages; (3) IPR aggregation funds for open source software; and (4) firms that identify and acquire patents for the purpose of preventing violations and litigation costs.

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS: TRANSFER ARRANGEMENTS
.......................................................................

The heart of any IPR transfer is a grant of license that permits the other party to use the relevant right. The conditions of that use and the compensation to the licensor form the balance of the agreement.

Right to Use and Conditions of Use

The licensor often agrees to provide services to facilitate the anticipated activities, such as assistance in setting up an assembly line or other training and technical support. The licensor generally seeks to restrict the licensee’s use of the transferred IPR. One common type of restriction is geographical limita-tions. For example, a licensor of a “name brand” doll may limit the licensee’s sale of that doll within a specific nation. Field of use limitations restrict the applications for which the licensee may employ the IPR. For example, the licensor of a laser technology


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

464Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




might permit one licensee to use the technology only in connection with medical applications, while retain-ing for itself the right to use the technology for communications applications and other uses. Other potential restrictions include output or customer restrictions, especially if the licensor plans to use the licensee as a source of products for the licensor’s own distribution requirements.

When the licensor’s economic return depends on the licensee’s marketing success, the licensor may seek to impose various obligations on the exploitation of the licensed IPR. The licensee usually will be expected to pledge to use its “best efforts” to develop a market for the products manufactured with the IPR. Many licensors go farther, demanding that the licensee comply with specific marketing quotas under pain of losing its license.

Competitive Circumstances

When exploitation of the licensed IPR requires significant financial or other resources of the licensee, it will often demand exclusive rights in the IPR within some geographic area in order to enhance its chances of earning an adequate return on its investment. The licensor, on the other hand, may not want to “put all of its eggs in one basket.” A licensee may fail for many reasons, such as lack of commitment, inability to secure financing, or marketing inadequacies. Meanwhile, competing technologies may come into the market, the licensor’s patents may expire, or other events may intrude to reduce the long-term prospects for the venture. Licensors who are concerned about such risks sometimes grant rights to two or more licensees who are willing to compete to develop the target market.

Licensees faced with this situation will probably attempt to negotiate some compensating advantage, such as a reduced royalty obligation. Setting the royalty level for a particular IPR can be a difficult proposition, especially when the degree of market demand for the IPR may not yet be clear. Setting the royalty level too high may boost the total price for the end products to a level that is not competitive with substitute products available in the market. Demand may be high in Dijon for a hamburger sold using McDonald’s trademarked materials and quality con-trol practices, justifying a higher price, but at some point, consumers will be happier with a Brand X hamburger produced by someone who does not pay royalties. This will cause sales and royalties to decline,



hurting licensor and licensee alike. The trick is to identify a royalty level that allows both licensor and licensee to optimize their respective returns.

Confidentiality and Improvements

Another key license provision is the clause that sets forth the licensee’s obligation to keep the licensed technology confidential so that third parties cannot exploit the technology. Such provisions are critical when the IPR being licensed is a technology that is protected primarily by trade secret procedures rather than patent law. The licensee often will try to limit the length of time during which it must maintain confidentiality, while the licensor will try to preserve confidentiality for the anticipated useful life of the trade secret. The parties may also bargain over the specific means by which the licensee will be expected to safeguard the confidential technology. For instance, the licensor may demand that the licensee’s employees enter into confidentiality and non-exploitation agreements that the licensor can enforce in the event of a breach. The licensor might also demand that only employees who “need to know” the technology be informed of it.

The parties will also usually negotiate over owner-ship and use rights if the licensee develops improve-ments in the licensed technology or creates new inventions based on that technology. Reasoning that the licensee would not have had the opportunity to develop these useful technologies without the know-how supplied by the licensor, the licensor may seek a grant back to itself of ownership in or at least the right to use—often without compensation—such new technology.

Licensors and licensees also haggle about termina-tion issues. These principally focus on the length of time during which the licensee may exploit the licensed IPR; what events may cause the license to terminate early; and what, if any, rights the licensee will have in the IPR after termination. Thus, the licensor will try to be sure that the licensee agrees not to use the IPR in competition with the licensor or to disclose it to a potential competitor. The licensee, on the other hand, will try to keep royalties low and minimize or abbreviate the duration of noncompeti-tion or nondisclosure provisions.

Many of the conflicts discussed here are often at issue during negotiations of IPR transfer agreements, whether domestic or international. The principal difference in the international scenario is that the host government often creates circumstances that favor the local licensee.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	465




INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION FOR PATENTS, TRADEMARKS, AND OTHER INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
.......................................................................

Host countries regulate transfers of IPRs through a variety of direct and indirect means. Governments will be more or less protective of intellectual property, depending on its economic interests. Nations that gen-erate intellectual property tend to favor strong protec-tion, and those that do not create such property tend to oppose it. This conflict has been played out in interna-tional treaty negotiations where these nations work out common interests.

Whatever differences there are in the scope of protection, there is general agreement that some protection is necessary. If not, inventors will not take their innovations to non-protecting states and their commercial development will be disadvantaged.

During the last century, nations struggled to establish a consistent international legal system of intellectual property, with only limited success. The benefits of open trade in IPRs were often outweighed by a desire not to permit foreigners to profit through the sale of mere ideas. Progress was slow when intellectual property was a less important engine of wealth than industrial organization. The digital and telecommunications revolution made intellectual property an increasingly significant source of product value. Not surprisingly, the creators of this new value have moved rapidly to protect it through a compre-hensive series of treaties. Nations that formerly opposed such treaties have conceded many issues, recognizing the hopelessness of competing without access to the new technology. These treaties streamline and standardize procedures, expand the geographic scope of protection, and create a much stronger international IPR enforcement network.

Paris Convention

The first international property treaty was the Inter-national Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, better known as the Paris Convention. The Paris Convention, originally prepared in 1883 and since revised many times, guarantees that in each signatory country, foreign trademark and patent applications from other signatory countries will receive the same treatment and priority as those from domestic



applicants. “Nationals of each of the [signatory] countries … shall, as regards the protection of indus-trial property, enjoy in all the other countries … the advantages that their respective laws now grant, or may hereafter grant, to nationals … .” In other words, no signatory country can give intellectual property protection to its own citizens unless it provides the same protection to the citizens of the other signatories. By implementing this principle of “nati-onal treatment”—an animating principle of all intel-lectual property treaties—the Paris Convention targeted discrimination against foreigners in obtaining patents.

The Paris Convention also gives a patent holder in any signatory country a right of priority. The convention provides that the date of an applicant’s foreign application is deemed to be the same as the date of the applicant’s original application on the same invention, so long as the foreign application was filed before the first anniversary of the original application. Because in most countries the first to file is the patent holder, this principle prevented a “race to the patent office” in other countries after the original filing.

There were two main problems with the Paris Convention scheme. First, the convention does not require any minimum substantive standard of patent protection. Thus, if a nation has no pharmaceutical R&D capability, it can decide that it is “immoral” to permit pharmaceutical patents and deny patent protection to pharmaceuticals. Although as a practical matter such a law is aimed at foreigners—because no locals have pharmaceutical patents—it is in compli-ance with the Paris Convention.

Another drawback of the convention is its lack of an enforcement mechanism. Disputes under the treaty are to be resolved by the International Court of Justice, but most signatory countries either do not recognize the court’s jurisdiction or ignore rulings with which it does not agree. Consequently, there is no real procedure for enforcing verdicts other than voluntary compliance. In the 1990s, the developed nations determined to resolve these two defects of the Paris Convention. The result was the TRIPS Agreement, discussed later.

Patents

In 1970, the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) supplemented the Paris Convention by establishing a centralized utility patent application process. The PCT has been signed by 142 states. A PCT application is filed on a standard form with the World Intellectual


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

466Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




Property Organization (WIPO). The WIPO, a United Nations agency headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, processes the common application and forwards it to the countries designated by the applicant. If at least one of the applicants named in the PCT application is a national or resident of a PCT signatory, the PCT gives the application a priority claim on that invention in all signatory states. With a priority claim, the applicant business has up to 30 months after filing to begin the administrative processing (prosecution) of the application in the countries in which it wishes to obtain protection. This allows the applicant to lock in an application date while giving it time to raise capital on the basis of the patent filing. If capital cannot be raised—which suggests that there is inadequate commercial interest—the applicant can walk away without having spent needless sums in worldwide patent prosecution.

Europe has a consolidated multinational patent application. Since 1978, a patentee can obtain protection in all EU countries by filing a single application under the European Patent Convention. The convention is now in force in 38 countries. This system was enhanced in December 1989 when the member states signed the Agreement Relating to Community Patents, which created a unitary system for the application and grant of European patents and a uniform system for the resolution of litigation concerning patent infringement. Under this system, all persons seeking a European patent complete the same PCT application form and file it with the European Patent Office (EPO), located in Munich, Germany. The EPO’s Revocation Division and Patent Administration Division grant and revoke patents for the entire EU. The grant of a European patent by the EPO must be “validated” in a member state and enforcement occurs in the member state’s courts rather than a common European court system.

Infringement actions are brought in Community Patent Courts of First Instance and Second Instance, with all appeals to a single Common Patent Appeal Court for the entire EU. As a further bit of streamlining, the EPO filing is coordinated with the PCT process. An applicant can complete the PCT standard filing and designate the EPO as a “country” of origin to obtain both EPO and PCT protection.

The PCT system applies only to utility patents, that is, patents protecting a novel and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter. There is a separate but similar treaty system for design patents, patents protecting the ornamental features of an article of manufacture.



The Hague System for the International Registra-tion of Industrial Designs first entered into force in 1925. It has been amended and supplemented several times, most recently by the Geneva Act of the Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Industrial Designs (better known as the Geneva Act), which establishes a single standard application and single design patent filing process. The Geneva Act entered into force in December 2003. To date, the act has been ratified or acceded to by only 45 members. The United States has signed the act but has not yet ratified it. On December 19, 2012, President Obama signed into law the Patent Law Treaties Implementation Act of 2012 (PLTIA). The PLTIA harmonizes U.S. law for design patents with the Geneva Act. For example, the PLTIA extends the term of all U.S. design patents to 15 years from the date of grant (instead of the current 14-year term). The United States also reformed its utility patent system in 2011, in part to harmonize it with the rest of the world. For example, section 3(p) of the Leahy-Smith America Invents Act states that “[i]t is the sense of the Congress that converting the United States patent system from ‘first to invent’ to a system of ‘first inventor to file’ will improve the United States patent system and promote harmonization of the United States patent system with the patent systems com-monly used in nearly all other countries throughout the world … .”

One area that has generated significant controversy is the scope of patentable subject matter. Governments and organizations in some emerging countries have argued that corporations from more developed nations engage in biopiracy, meaning they extract native or indigenous plants and animals for research (with the help of local knowledge), alter the plant or animal (such as through genetic engineering), and then obtain patents related to this research without providing the host country with compensation or affordable access to the inventions. Biotechnology corporations argue that they are perform-ing research and pursuing innovation that would not occur without the ability to protect inventions that arise from this research. For example, a company might patent a particular strain of rice that has been genetically altered to withstand pests and provide greater yields. Even if the unaltered strain came from a particular country, the company would argue it provided significant resources to develop the new strain and should not have to give away this invention for free. As discussed in the following case, the scope of patentable subject matter continues to be a subject of dispute.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	467





Diamond v. Chakrabarty

447 U.S. 303 (1980) United States Supreme Court


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

After genetically engineering a bacterium capable of breaking down crude oil, Ananda Chakrabarty sought to patent his creation under Title 35 U.S. Code Section 101, which states that “[w]hoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improve-ment thereof, may obtain a patent … .” The U.S. Patent Office (PTO) rejected a claim to the bacterium itself on the grounds that living things are not patentable under Section 101. The Court of Customs and Patent Appeals reversed the PTO’s decision and the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear Diamond’s appeal. The Court was faced with the question of whether the creation of a live, human-made organism was patentable under Title 35 U.S.C. Section 101.


CHIEF JUSTICE BURGER

In 1972, respondent Chakrabarty, a microbiologist, filed a patent application, assigned to the General Electric Co. The application asserted 36 claims related to Chakrabarty’s invention of “a bacterium from the genus Pseudomonas containing therein at least two stable energy-generating plasmids, each of said plas-mids providing a separate hydrocarbon degradative pathway.” This human-made, genetically engineered bacterium is capable of breaking down multiple components of crude oil. Because of this property, which is possessed by no naturally occurring bacteria, Chakrabarty’s invention is believed to have significant value for the treatment of oil spills … . The patent examiner allowed [some] claims … , but rejected claims for the bacteria. His decision rested on two grounds: (1) that microorganisms are “products of nature,” and (2) that as living things they are not patentable subject matter under 35 U.S.C. § 101 … . The Constitution grants Congress broad power to legislate to “promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries.” Art. I, § 8, cl. 8. The patent laws promote this progress by offering inventors exclusive rights for a limited period as an incentive for their inventiveness and research efforts … . The authority of Congress is exercised in the hope that “[t]he productive effort thereby fostered will have a positive effect on society through the introduc-tion of new products and processes of manufacture into the economy, and the emanations by way of increased employment and better lives for our citizens.”

The question before us in this case is a narrow one of statutory interpretation requiring us to construe 35 U.S.C. § 101, which provides: “Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, may obtain a patent thereof, subject to the conditions and requirements of this title.” Specifically, we must determine whether respondent’s microorganism constitutes a “manufac-ture” or “composition of matter” within the meaning of the statute.

In cases of statutory construction we begin, of course, with the language of the statute. And “unless otherwise defined, words will be interpreted as taking their ordinary, contemporary common meaning.” We have also cautioned that courts “should not read into the patent laws limitations and conditions which the legislature has not expressed.”

Guided by these canons of construction, this Court has read the term “manufacture” in § 101 in accor-dance with its dictionary definition to mean “the production of articles for use from raw or prepared materials by giving to these materials new forms, qualities, properties, or combinations, whether by hand-labor or by machinery.” Similarly, “composition of matter” has been construed consistent with its common usage to include “all compositions of two or more substances and … all composite articles, whether they be the results of chemical union, or of mechanical mixture, or whether they be gases, fluids, powders or solids.” In choosing such expansive terms as “manu-facture” and “composition of matter,” modified by the comprehensive “any,” Congress plainly contemplated that the patent laws would be given wide scope.

The relevant legislative history also supports a broad construction. The Patent Act of 1793, authored by Thomas Jefferson, defined statutory subject matter as “any new and useful art, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new or useful improve-ment [thereof].” Act of Feb. 21, 1793, § 1. The Act embodied Jefferson’s philosophy that “ingenuity should receive a liberal encouragement.” Subsequent patent statutes in 1836, 1870, and 1874 employed this same broad language. In 1952, when the patent laws were re-codified, Congress replaced the word “art” with “process,” but otherwise left Jefferson’s language intact. The Committee Reports accompanying the 1952 Act inform us that Congress intended statutory subject matter to “include anything under the sun that is made by man.”


continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

468Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




continued

This is not to suggest that § 101 has no limits or that	products of nature, whether living or not, and human-
it  embraces  every  discovery.  The  laws  of  nature,	made inventions. Here, respondent’s microorganism is
physical phenomena, and abstract ideas have been	the result of human ingenuity and research. Hence, the
held not patentable. Thus, a new mineral discovered in	passage of the Plant Patent Act affords the Government
the earth or a new plant found in the wild is not	no support.
patentable subject matter. Likewise, Einstein could not	Nor does the passage of the 1970 Plant Variety
patent  his  celebrated  law  that  E = mc2;  nor  could	Protection  Act  support  the  Government’s  position.
Newton  have  patented  the  law  of  gravity.  Such	As  the  Government  acknowledges,  sexually  repro-
discoveries are “manifestations of … nature, free to all	duced plants were not included under the 1930 Act
men and reserved exclusively to none.”	because new varieties could not be reproduced true-
Judged in this light, respondent’s micro-organism	to-type through seedlings. By 1970, however, it was
plainly qualifies as patentable subject matter. His claim	generally  recognized  that  true-to-type  reproduction
is not to a hitherto unknown natural phenomenon, but to a	was possible and that plant patent protection was
non-naturally occurring manufacture or composition of	therefore appropriate … .
matter-a product of human ingenuity “having a distinctive	To buttress his argument, the petitioner, with the
name, character [and] use … . “ Here … , the patentee has	support of amicus, points to grave risks that may be
produced  a  new  bacterium  with  markedly  different	generated  by  research  endeavors  such  as  respon-
characteristics from any found in nature and one having	dent’s.  The  briefs  present  a  gruesome  parade  of
the potential for significant utility. His discovery is not	horribles.  Scientists,  among  them  Nobel  laureates,
nature’s handiwork, but his own; accordingly it is patent-	are  quoted  suggesting  that  genetic  research  may
able subject matter under § 101.	pose a serious threat to the human race, or, at the
Two contrary arguments are advanced, neither of	very least, that the dangers are far too substantial to
which we find persuasive. The petitioner’s first argument	permit such research to proceed apace at this time. We
rests on the enactment of the 1930 Plant Patent Act, which	are told that genetic research and related technological
afforded patent protection to certain asexually reproduced	developments may spread pollution and disease, that it
plants, and the 1970 Plant Variety Protection Act, which	may	result in a loss of genetic diversity, and that
authorized protection for certain sexually reproduced	its practice may tend to depreciate the value of human
plants but excluded bacteria from its protection. In the	life … . We disagree. The grant or denial of patents on
petitioner’s view, the passage of these Acts evidences	microorganisms is not likely to put an end to genetic
congressional understanding that the terms “manufac-	research or to its attendant risks. The large amount of
ture” or “composition of matter” do not include living	research that has already occurred when no researcher
things; if they did, the petitioner argues, neither Act would	had sure knowledge that patent protection would be
have been necessary … . We reject this argument. Prior to	available suggests that legislative or judicial fiat as to
1930, two factors were thought to remove plants from	patentability will not deter the scientific mind from
patent protection. The first was the belief that plants, even	probing into the unknown any more than Canute could
those  artificially  bred,  were  products  of  nature  for	command the tides … .
purposes of the patent law. The second obstacle to patent	Decision.	Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of
protection for plants was the fact that plants were thought		
	Customs	and Patent Appeals was affirmed, allowing
not amenable to the “written description” requirement of		
	the patenting of living organisms in the United States.
the patent law. Because new plants may differ from old	
			
only  in  color  or  perfume,  differentiation  by  written	Case Questions
description was often impossible.	
In enacting the Plant Patent Act, Congress addressed	1.  The	foregoing  decision  was  decided  by  the
both of these concerns. It explained at length its belief		Supreme Court by only a 5 to 4 vote. Do less-
that the work of the plant breeder “in aid of nature” was		developed nations agree with the majority or the
patentable invention. And it relaxed the written descrip-		minority? Why?
tion requirement in favor of “a description … as complete	2.  Has the development of artificial life forms been
as is reasonably possible.” No Committee or Member of		encouraged by the Supreme Court‘s decision? Is
Congress, however, expressed the broader view, now		this a good thing? What would have happened to
urged by the petitioner, that the terms “manufacture” or		the Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico without
“composition  of  matter”  exclude  living  things …  .		crude oil-ingesting organisms?
Congress [] recognized that the relevant distinction was	3.	Do industrialized nations like the United States
not between living and inanimate things, but between		tend to expand the scope of IPRs? Why?
			



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	469




Trademarks

As previously noted, registered trademarks are assured national treatment by the Paris Convention. The Paris Convention also confers a right of priority to a trademark holder if the foreign registrations are made within six months after the original registration. In contrast, trademark prosecution is usually based on the law of the country where registration is sought.

Europe has a centralized multinational trademark registration system. Since 1996, the Community Trade-mark Regulation, administered by the Office for Harmo-nization in the Internal Market (OHIM), has allowed a single trademark registration enforceable throughout the EU. The Trademark Regulation also provides a unified enforcement authority, the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market. Infringement in any member state can be prosecuted through this office.

The system established in the 1989 protocol to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks of 1891 (Madrid Protocol ), like the PCT, provides a centralized filing system on a standard form and a designation of the countries in which trademark registration is sought. The WIPO also administers the prosecution and notifies desig-nated countries. Although 89 countries have joined the Protocol (including the United States), the European Union and many other nations have not.

Domain Names

Trademark law also protects Internet domain names. After much international negotiation, in August 1999, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) adopted the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP). The UDRP set forth general “first to file” rules for domain names, but excepted bad-faith filings. This “first to file rule” led to the practice of



cybersquatting, which is the registering of a domain name with the intent to profit from the goodwill of a trademark belonging to another. Typically, the cybersquatter offers to sell the domain to the company who owns the trademark at an inflated price. Over time, the desire to stop cybersquat-ting led to an expansion of what “bad faith” means in the UDRP context. At common law, bad faith means intentional wrongful behavior, but in the UDRP, it now includes some negligence without a finding of intent. For example, a negligent failure to conduct prior checks for third-party rights has been held to constitute bad faith. The UDRP also created an innovative dispute resolution process that submits complaints and replies electronically over the Internet to a WIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center.

In January 2000, the first case was decided under the UDRP. The WIPO panel determined that the defendant cybersquatter had registered the domain name “worldwrestlingfederation.com” in bad faith and ordered him to cease using it. The new process meted out swift justice: It took only six weeks from submission of the initial complaint to the ultimate decision. In the years since, the UDRP process has continued to provide a refreshingly quick and uncomplicated way of resolving Internet IPR disputes. More than 18,000 complaints have already been filed under the UDRP, concerning more than 30,000 domain names. Ninety-seven percent of these cases have been resolved.

Individual countries can also pass legislation to curb cybersquatting. The United States was the first nation to pass such legislation. In 1999, the United States enacted the Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act, which prohibits registering, trafficking in, or using a domain name with bad faith intent to profit from the goodwill of a trademark owner. Other countries have followed, includ-ing Japan, which passed legislation in 2001 expanding their unfair competition prevention laws to include domain name protection.




WIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center

Mobile Communication Service Inc. v. WebReg, RN Administrative

Panel Decision (February 24, 2006), Case No. D2005-1304


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

The complainant was Mobile Communication Service, Inc., which did business under the name Mobilcom. The domain name in question was “mobilcom.com,” which had been registered by respondent WebReg, RN. Mobilcom con-tended that the domain name consisted entirely of its trademark, that WebReg lacked any rights or legitimate interests in that name, that there was no evidence that


WebReg was making a legitimate non-commercial or fair use of the domain name, and that the domain name was registered and being used in bad faith. Mobilcom noted that WebReg had offered to sell the domain name for $35,000, which they argued was consistent with WebReg’s pattern of registering domain names that incorporate the marks of third parties and offering them for sale.

continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




continued



DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

The burden for Complainant under paragraph 4(a) of [UDRP] is to prove:

(i)that the Domain Name registered by Respon-dent is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark or service mark in which Complain-ant has rights; and

(ii)that Respondent has no rights or legitimate interests in respect of the Domain Name; and

(iii)that the Domain Name has been registered and is being used in bad faith.

A.Identical or confusingly similar Complainant alleges that it owns a Pennsylvania trademark registra-tion. State trademark registrations, though, are entitled to minimal weight because they are not examined and thus do not represent persuasive evidence of ownership of a valid, distinctive trademark … . Thus, to prevail under the first factor, Complainant will need to establish com-mon law trademark rights in the MOBILCOM name … . Turning to the evidence in this case, the Panel finds that Complain ant has alleged sufficient facts to establish com-mon law trademark rights … .

B. Rights or legitimate interests The website to which the Domain Name resolves is entitled “Tech Buyer.com” and contains links to other sites that offer technology and Internet-related services that appear to compete with those offered by Complainant. This type of use is neither a bona fide offering of goods or services pursuant to paragraph 4(c)(i) of the Policy nor a legitimate non-commercial or fair use pursuant to paragraph 4(c)(iii)

…. The Panel thus finds that Complainant has satisfied the requirements of paragraph 4(a)(ii) of the Policy.

C. Registered and used in bad faith	As noted above,

Internet users who access the website associated with the Domain Name are directed to a website that offers certain services that compete with those offered by Complainant. Using a domain name “to redirect Internet users to websites that host links to external websites, including websites of Complainant’s competi-tors,” is evidence of bad faith … .

In addition, Respondent offered the Domain Name for sale for $35,000, a sum that is far in excess of the cost of registering a domain name. In the absence of a legitimate interest by Respondent, the offer to sell the Domain Name for a price in excess of registration costs supports an in-ference that Respondent registered the Domain Name in bad faith, with the primary purpose of selling it in violation of paragraph 4(b)(i) of the Policy … .

Finally, Complainant asserts that Respondent is guilty of a pattern of registering domain names to prevent the own-ers of trademarks from reflecting their marks in the corre-sponding domain names. [The Panel then summarized seven other UDRP complaints in which WebReg had been

found to be in violation of the bad faith standard.] Based on a review of these decisions, it appears that Respondent’s business practice includes the registration of domain names containing fanciful trademarks … trademarks cre-ated by the joinder of common or dictionary words … and [those] that have expired … followed by efforts to resell those names. Although this Panel has held (including in a number of cases in which Respondent’s counsel repre-sented the respondent) that it is not bad faith to resell do-main names that incorporate common dictionary terms if the respondent was unaware of complainant’s trademark rights at the time of registration … respondents cannot rely on this precedent to shield their conduct by closing their eyes to whether domain names they are registering are identical or confusingly similar to trademarks. In other words, where a respondent has registered a domain name consisting of a dictionary term because the respondent has a good faith belief that the domain name’s value derives from its generic qualities, that may constitute a legitimate interest and the offer to sell such a domain name is not nec-essarily a sign of bad faith. Where, in contrast, a respondent registers large swaths of domain names for resale, often through automated programs that snap up domain names as they become available, with no attention whatsoever to whether they may be identical to trademarks, such prac-tices may well support a finding that respondent is engaged in a pattern of conduct that deprives trademark owners of the ability to register domain names reflecting their marks.

On the record of this case, the Panel believes it a fair inference that Respondent’s conduct falls into the latter category … . [E]ven a cursory search on search engines like Yahoo! and Google would have shown that MOBIL-COM is a trademark. The Panel thus concludes that Respondent has registered this Domain Name to prevent Complainant from reflecting its mark in the corresponding .com Domain Name, and that Respon-dent is engaged in a pattern of such conduct.

Complainant has therefore satisfied the require-ments of paragraph 4(a)(iii) of the Policy.

Decision. For all the foregoing reasons, in accor-dance with paragraphs 4(i) of the Policy and 15 of the [UDRP], the Panel orders that the Domain Name <mobilcom.com> be transferred to Complainant.

Case Questions

1.Would the complainant have won the case if it could not show that it had an interest in the name Mobil-com? Must all of the elements be shown to get relief?

2.Is it acceptable to have a business selling domain names? How must such a business show that it creates domain names?

3.How could it be shown that the company creating domain names was aware of another firm’s use of a dictionary word as a trademark?


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	471




Copyrights

The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, better known as the Berne Convention, deals with the granting of copyrights among signatory nations. Like the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention is based on a national treatment scheme: Each signatory nation must afford foreigners the same treatment as its own citizens. Unlike the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention requires all 164 signatory nations to enact certain minimum substantive laws. These include prohibi-tions against copying literary and artistic works and granting authors exclusive rights to adaptations and broadcasts of works. In contrast to the fragmented patent and trademark system, there is no filing requirement. All an author needs to do is affix the symbol (©) and the year of authorship to provide copyright protection throughout the world. The Berne Convention signatories agree to grant national treatment to copyright holders from other signatories automatically from the moment of creation rather than the time of filing.

The computer revolution and the growth of the Internet have brought software copyright issues to the forefront. First, there was a significant dispute as to whether computer programs were copyrightable subject matter. This was resolved in late December 1996, when WIPO approved the Draft Treaty on Certain Questions Concerning the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, providing that: “Com-puter programs are protected as literary works within the meaning of Article 2 of the Berne Convention. Such protection applies to the expression of a computer program in any form.” This treaty, also known as the WIPO Copyright Treaty or the Protocol to the Berne Convention, entered into force in 2002, and 88 countries are signatories. It expands the scope of broadcasts that an author must permit to include “any communication to the public of their works, by wire or wireless means, including the making available to the public of their works in such a way that members of the public may access these works from a place and a time individually chosen by them.” Naturally, this is carefully crafted to include access through the Internet. Together with the Performances and Phonograms Treaty, passed at the same time, the Protocol to the Berne Convention sought to tighten international law by requiring signatory nations to provide adequate legal protec-tion against the circumvention of technological



security measures, effective remedies against the knowing removal of electronic rights-management information and the related acts of distribution, and necessary measures to permit effective action against any act of infringement of rights covered by the treaties.

The United States wanted this protection to go even further. It sought to cover even temporary reproduc-tion of copyrighted material unless the nation enacted certain minimum standards of protection. Because the Internet works by sending packets of data into a computer’s temporary memory, this would have created significant issues as to Internet “browsing.” The dispute was resolved through an Agreed Interpre-tation of a Treaty provision, and that interpretation has been implemented in different contexts.

All of these provisions had dubious significance in the context of the Berne Convention. Like the Paris Convention, it has been difficult to enforce the Berne Convention effectively. This enforcement problem was one of the principal forces that drove negotiations on the TRIPS Agreement.

Because of their substantial film and music industries, developed countries, particularly the United States, have strong incentives to protect copyrighted works. In 1998, the United States passed the Copyright Term Extension Act (CTEA) that extended copyright terms in the United States. The law, also known as the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act or as the Mickey Mouse Protection Act, effectively delayed the date at which copyrighted works would enter the public domain until at least 2019. Emerging economies, on the other hand, do not have strong incentives to pass legislation protecting and enforcing IPRs and have historical or societal conditions that have hindered such legislation. For instance, with the advent of the communist regime in China in 1949, all existing statutes, including copyright law, were repudiated. In addition, intellectuals lost all political power under Mao Zedong. China started legislating IPRs again after it officially reestablished diplomatic relations with the United States in 1979. The two countries entered bilateral agreements covering copyright law. In 1990, China enacted its first comprehensive copyright laws, and after China entered into the World Trade Organization in 2001, it completely overhauled its intellectual property system, amending the patent, copyright, and trademark laws, to comply with the TRIPS Agreement.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace






TVBO Production Limited v. Australia Sky Net Pty Limited

FCA 1132 (2009) Federal Court of Australia


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Television Broadcasts Limited (TVB), based in Hong Kong, owned a Chinese language miniseries called Twin of Brothers. Its subsidiary, TVBO, owned the copyright in each episode in all countries except Hong Kong. TVB and affiliated companies filed a complaint against four respondents in the Federal Court of Australia. The first respondent, Australia Sky Net, was a pay television service in Australia. The fourth respondent, Chinese Satellite Communications, was a media company based in Taiwan. TVB’s complaint alleged that the four respondents worked together to intercept and rebroadcast TVB’s Twin of Brothers miniseries to Australia in violation of Australia’s Copyright Act of 1968 and Copyright (International Protection) Regulations of 1969. The fourth respondent refused to appear in the lawsuit.


JUSTICE FOSTER

Section 184 of the Act provides that the Regulations made under the Act may make provision applying any of the provisions of the Act … , in relation to a country (other than Australia) so specified, in a number of different ways set out in that section. Regulation 4(1) of the Copyright (International Protection) Regulations 1969 provides that a provision of the Act that applies in relation to (amongst other things) cinematograph film made or first published in Australia applies in relation to such film made or first published in a Berne Convention country or in a WTO country: (a) In the same way as the provision applies, under the Act, in relation to an Australian work or subject-matter; and (b) As if the foreign work or subject matter were made or first published in Australia.

China is a Berne Convention country and a WTO country within the meaning of that Regulation … . copyright under the Act will subsist in any cinemato-graph film made in Hong Kong and protection will be afforded to such film under the Act. The evidence demonstrates that the Twin of Brothers series was made in Hong Kong in the period from July 2003 to August 2004. Copyright therefore subsists in each episode of the Twin of Brothers series … . The applicants [] tendered two VCD box sets of the title Twin of Brothers, one for sale in Hong Kong and one for sale in Macau. The box set for sale in Hong Kong bore the following statement on its packaging: © Television Broadcasts Limited & TVBO Production Limited

(Release in 2004). That tender was made for the purpose of placing the applicants in a position to rely upon the presumptions contained in §131 of the Act, should it become necessary to do so. Section 131(1) provides that a person shall be presumed to be the maker of the film where the name of a person appears on copies of a cinematograph film made available to the public in such a way as to imply that the person was the maker of that film. Subsections 131(2) and 131(3) provide that where articles or things embodying the film have been supplied commercially and, at the time of supply, the article or their container bore a label with a “©” and the year and name of a person, then it is presumed that the film was made in that year and that the person so named is the owner of the copyright in that film … . [I]n the present case, the applicants are entitled to rely upon the presumptions raised by §131 of the Act with the consequence that, unless the contrary is established, the Court will presume that TVB and TVBO are the owners of copyright in the cinematograph films which comprise the series Twin of Brothers and that those films were made in 2004.

The applicants tendered certain paragraphs of an affidavit sworn by the third respondent in certain proceedings in the Supreme Court of New South Wales in order to prove several facts and matters relevant to an understanding of the way in which subscribers to the first respondent’s [Australia Sky Net] subscription service are able to view television signals in Australia. In that affidavit, the third respondent swore that: (a) The fourth respondent [Chinese Satellite Communications] retransmits 16 free-to-air programs available in Taipei (the Taipei channels) from Taiwan to the east coast of Australia using the Measat-2 satellite;

(b)Each of the Taipei channels is transmitted within and/or received in Taiwan using different signals of different frequencies; (c) In retransmitting the Taipei channels, the fourth respondent encrypts 14 of the 16 signals and then uplinks all of the Taipei channels’ signals from the transmitters to the Measat-2 satellite. The remaining two of the 16 signals are uplinked and transmitted without encryption; (d) The satellite

transponder	downlinks	the	signals	into	Australia;

(e)Subscribers to the first respondent’s pay television service are able to view the scrambled 14 Taipei channels using [certain] equipment provided by the first respondent to those subscribers … ; (g) The fourth respondent is responsible for activating and deactivating the smart cards which allow the signals to be de-encrypted.

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	473



continued

The retransmission of the Taipei channels is only	Episode 5 of Twin of Brothers, it seems to me that it
made  possible  by  the  fourth  respondent  leasing	communicated by electronic transmission that episode
capacity on the Measat-2 satellite. Having leased such	to the public in Australia. It caused the requisite signals
capacity, the fourth respondent then sends its signal	to be transmitted from its base station in Taiwan to
containing the Taipei channels from its base station in	subscribers of the first respondent’s pay television
Taiwan to the Measat-2 satellite. The signal is then	service within Australia. It determined the content of
downlinked  by  the  satellite  to  the  east  coast  of	the communication … . The fourth respondent’s trans-
Australia. This enables subscribers of the first respon-	mission emanated from Taiwan, but this circumstance
dent’s service located in New South Wales, Victoria and	does not absolve it from liability. The transmission was
Queensland to view the channels … .	received by pay TV subscribers within Australia. The
The evidence establishes that, on 28 January 2007,	fourth respondent did not have a licence to transmit
the fourth respondent transmitted Episode 5 of Twin of	that episode to the first respondent’s subscribers within
Brothers to subscribers of the first respondent’s pay	Australia.  I  find  that,  unless  restrained,  the  fourth
television service in Australia. The transmission was	respondent will, in all probability, repeat this conduct.
made  on  Channel  8  of  the  first  respondent’s  pay	For these reasons, I consider that the fourth respondent
television service and was available only to subscribers	infringed TVBO’s copyright in Episode 5 of Twin of
of  that  service.  It  was  encrypted.  The  applicants	Brothers … .
submitted that this transmission probably occurred in	Decision.   The Court found the defendants guilty of
the following way: Episode 5 of Twin of Brothers was	
	copyright infringement and granted TVBO its requested
originally broadcast by the Fujian Media Group on its	
	relief.
channel SETV. That organisation is based in China.	
	
That  broadcast  occurred  with  the  permission  and	Case Questions
licence of TVBO. That broadcast was received by the	
	
fourth respondent and intercepted by it. It was then	1.  How difficult would it have been for plaintiffs like
retransmitted to Australia without the permission of the	TVBO to find out who was stealing and rebroad-
appropriate entities. It is clear that the retransmission	casting its signal?
by the fourth respondent of Episode 5 of Twin of	2.  How would an Australian court enforce its juris-
Brothers on this occasion was not licensed by or on	diction over a foreign copyright infringer?
behalf of TVBO.	3.  If it were difficult to trace this type of piracy, would
I  accept  these  submissions  and  make  findings	it be worthwhile for the pirate to continue? How
accordingly … . Having regard to the means deployed	would a court system discourage this type of
by  the  fourth  respondent  to  transmit  to  Australia	piracy?
	


TRIPS

As intellectual property became increasingly valuable, the developed world—which created virtually all such property—increased pressure to cure the defects of the Paris and Berne Convention systems. These efforts bore fruit in the GATT Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), which became effective in most nations on January 1, 2000. TRIPS requires its signatories to enact minimum substantive standards of protection and create a viable enforcement mechanism. In effect, TRIPS has caused developing countries to adopt intellectual property laws that approximate those of Europe and North America and has created a system to enforce them.

TRIPS requires every member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) to abide by the Paris and Berne Conventions—including the recent protocols to those

treaties—and apply the treaties’ national treatment requirements so that all foreign IPR owners receive the same protection as local nationals. It establishes 50-year copyright protection pursuant to the Berne Convention. All WTO members must recognize the patent holders’ right to assign or license their patents and the term of patent protection must be at least 20 years.

Patent protection is also now available for “any new inventions, whether products or processes, in all fields of technology, provided that they are new, involve an inventive step (nonobvious) and are capable of industrial application (useful).” TRIPS even established minimum standards for trade secret protection after the model of uniform trade secret statutes in the United States.

TRIPS seeks to remedy some of the acknowledged problems of the Paris and Berne Conventions. First,


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

474Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




unlike the Paris Convention, TRIPS sets minimum standards of intellectual property protection. A nation can no longer comply with international intellectual property law if its law provides no effective protection. Second, TRIPS requires signatory countries to ensure that enforcement procedures as specified in this Part are available under their laws so as to permit effective action against any act of infringement of intellectual property rights covered by this Agreement, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements and remedies which constitute a deterrent to further infringements.

If one nation believes that another is out of compliance, it can initiate a dispute proceeding before a WTO panel.

Because most industrialized countries had effective patent, copyright, and trademark systems in place before TRIPS, these countries became compliant with minor adjustments. However, TRIPS required many emerging nations to enact a new statutory scheme, including an adequate domestic enforcement mecha-nism. TRIPS was the first WTO agreement to impose “positive” obligations on WTO signatories to adopt new laws; previously, WTO agreements had relied on negative prohibitions. Although much stronger than previous WTO agreements, TRIPS has a number of drawbacks. The developed nations accepted an “escape clause” to the minimum substantive standards in Article 8 of TRIPS. Signatory nations may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention within their territory of the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public or morality, including to protect human, animal, or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment.

Although any actions taken under Article 8 must be “consistent with the provisions” of the TRIPS, Brazil may again refuse to grant pharmaceutical patents if it determines they are at odds with its concept of the ordre public (public order).

Developed nations counter that the exception was intended to be narrow, permitting patent infringement only for (1) noncommercial purposes, (2) research,

(3)experimentation for testing or improvement, and

(4)educational purposes. Litigation on the issue seems likely because many emerging countries are not inclined to pay large royalties on certain types of intellectual property, particularly in the area of medicines.

Complaints that a signatory nation is not comply-ing with its obligations under TRIPS are adjudicated



through a WTO dispute settlement mechanism. The majority of the complaints filed have been between developed countries. As of this writing, no country had been awarded the power to retaliate in response to the failure of another nation to fulfill its obligations under TRIPS.

Emerging nations fear that high-tech exports protected by intellectual property rights will slow development of their own industries and transfer local wealth abroad. Because local licensees form the local political constituency in emerging nations, these fears easily translate into massive domestic political pres-sure, leading signatory governments to reinterpret their treaty commitments. To the extent these nations seek to comply at all, they do so in the least restrictive way possible.

The Philippines, for example, created a TRIPS-compliant system for patenting and trademarking foreign drugs, but the legislature then took away most of the system’s economic value by requiring branded drug manufacturers to produce generic versions of their drugs. Another example of an attempt at reinterpretation is Canada’s assault on Article 33, which provides a 20-year term for patents. In the Canada 17-20 case, Canada defended its term of 17 years from grant for certain patents as sufficiently “consistent” with the term of 20 years from filing.

As discussed earlier, the TRIPS Agreement (Article 64) provides a mandatory mechanism for resolving disputes between WTO countries—the WTO dispute settlement process. For example, the United States filed a WTO dispute settlement case against China to resolve or curb piracy issues in China. Such an action was not available when China was outside the WTO. China’s WTO membership gave the United States a new process that includes consultations, negotiations, dispute settlement, and arbitration. Because of China’s WTO membership, however, the United States can no longer impose unilateral sanctions against China concerning the lack of intellectual property protection, as it threatened to do more than a decade ago. Indeed, the WTO process prohibits a member state from taking retaliatory measures before it exhausts all of the actions permissible under the rules.

Therefore, in 2007, under the pressure from lobby groups representing companies such as Microsoft and Walt Disney, the United States initiated WTO dispute settlement proceedings over the deficiencies in China’s legal regime for protecting and enforcing copyrights and trademarks in a proceeding called “China— Measures Affecting the Protection and Enforcement


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	475




of Intellectual Property Rights.” The European Com-munity, Japan, Canada, and Mexico joined in the consultations. The United States brought three main claims before the WTO panel: (1) China’s criminal laws maintain safe harbors that allow commercial-scale counterfeiting and piracy without the possibility of criminal prosecution or conviction for those acts;

(2)China has failed to give Chinese Customs officers the required authority for disposing of counterfeit and pirated imports; and (3) China denies automatic and immediate copyright protection to certain works, including those that have not yet cleared China’s content review process. In 2009, the Dispute Settle-ment Body of the WTO issued a report on the dispute between China and the United States, siding with China on the first claim and with the United States on the other two claims. In 2010, China implemented the recommendations of the report and amended its copyright laws and its regulations on customs protection of IPRs.


THE DOHA DECLARATION ON TRIPS AND PUBLIC HEALTH
.......................................................................

The effect of TRIPS on the pharmaceutical industry has been extensively debated. Increased protection of drug patents has serious implications for the availability of generic versions of drugs, an area of international con-cern in light of the exponential increase of HIV/AIDS in emerging nations. Worldwide debate focused on the connection between the cost of pharmaceuticals and the worsening public health of citizens of emerging countries. Emerging nations were concerned that TRIPS was being narrowly interpreted in a way that unduly limited the supply of generic drugs. Responding to these concerns, in November 2001 ministers of WTO member countries agreed to approve what is known as the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agree-ment and Public Health (Doha Declaration). The final text of the Doha Declaration recognizes the “gravity of the public health problems afflicting many developing and least-developed countries especially those resulting from HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other epi-demics” and the “need for TRIPS to be a wider national and international action to address these problems.” The WTO ministers stressed the importance of the implementation and interpretation of TRIPS in a manner that supports public health through improving access to existing medicines and formulating new medicines.



Developed countries were required to comply immediately with the requirements. Countries classi-fied as “developing,” such as India, were given ten years from the effective date of TRIPS, or until 2005, to become compliant. The least-developed countries, including many African states, are exempt from providing patent and trade secrets protection for pharmaceuticals until 2016. These least-developed countries were also permitted to retain their right to apply for additional extensions.

One key issue that was not resolved at the time of the Doha Ministerial Conference involved the inter-pretation of Section 31 of TRIPS, which permitted governments to issue compulsory licenses to allow companies to make patented products or use a patented process under license without the consent of the patent owners, but only under certain condi-tions intended to protect the legitimate interests of the patent holder. Article 31 (f) of TRIPS states that products made under compulsory licensing must be “predominantly for the supply of the domestic market.” While this section directly applies to countries that have the resources or host companies that have the capability to manufacture these phar-maceuticals, it indirectly affects less-developed coun-tries not equipped to manufacture pharmaceuticals by effectively limiting their ability to import cheaper generic drugs from countries that produce pharma-ceuticals under the compulsory licensing provisions of TRIPS.

The Doha Declaration assigned to the TRIPS Council the task of determining whether to provide additional flexibility so that countries unable to produce pharmaceuticals domestically could import patented drugs made under compulsory licensing. In August 2003, the TRIPS Council decided to allow any WTO member country to export pharmaceuticals made under compulsory licenses. The TRIPS Council decision took the form of an “interim waiver” of Section 31(f) that allowed countries producing generic copies of patented products under compulsory licenses to export the products to eligible importing countries. The waiver is intended to last until the relevant portion of TRIPS is amended. A decision to permanently amend TRIPS to incorporate this waiver was reached in December 2005, and this decision will become part of the agreement when two-thirds of the member states agree to it.

All WTO member countries are permitted to import pharmaceuticals under the TRIPS Council’s decision. However, 33 developed countries have


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

476Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




voluntarily announced that they will not avail themselves of this provision to import pharmaceuti-cals. Eleven other countries have announced that they will import pharmaceuticals under this provision only in a national emergency.

The War of Geographical Indications

Notwithstanding these attempts to standardize the law, a “mark” in one nation may still be a generic name in another. Until the recent attempts to standardize practice take effect, the determination of



whether an item is generic requires an analysis of the conditions in the country where a mark is sought. This is particularly well illustrated in the context of geographical indications , where a product, particu-larly a wine or liquor, is marketed by reference to a geographic region. For example, there has long been a dispute as to whether it is appropriate to label a sparkling wine made in the style developed in Champagne, France, as “champagne.” The following New Zealand case illustrates this “geographic indica-tions” dispute, while underscoring just how narrowly national the focus in trademark law can be.




New Zealand—Comite Interprofessionel du Vin de
Champagne v. Wineworths Group, Ltd.

2 N.Z.L.R 432 (1991) High Court of Wellington


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

An Australian company sought to sell sparkling wine in New Zealand. The wine was made in Australia from grapes grown in Australia, but was packaged in bottles that included the word “champagne” on the label. The Comite Interprofessionel du Vin de Champagne (CIVC), a group of champagne producers from the French depart-ment of Champagne, sought an injunction to prevent the Australians from “passing off” Australian sparkling wine as wine actually produced in the region of Champagne.

JUDGE JEFFRIES

These proceedings are brought by the plaintiffs to protect their claimed property right in the word “Champagne.” As an editorial policy in this judgment I am using the word champagne with a capital when it refers to the district and the wine from the district. The plaintiffs seek in effect to prevent the defendant from importing into New Zealand sparkling wine from Australia labeled champagne … .

Champagne … is relatively new, having its origin in time at the end of the seventeenth century but its final development was a nineteenth century phenomenon. Dom Perignon of the Benedictine Abbey of Hautvillers near Epernay in the Champagne district is credited with its beginning … . The two features of Champagne of prime importance for its uniqueness are the soil and climate in which the grapes are grown, and the method of manufacture by skilled personnel … . For the production of grapes for Champagne there are strict geographical limitations imposed by law … . By [French] law the wine allowed to carry the appellation Champagne must be produced exclusively within


precise zones … . The essence of the methode cham-penoise is that the process of second fermentation takes place in the bottle in which it is sold … .

This proceeding is about New Zealand law and the understanding of its people so it is appropriate to say something of the wine industry and wine drinking by New Zealanders. Viticulture commenced with the first settlers 150 years ago and never abated, but New Zealanders did not early develop a widespread interest in and use of wines either locally made or imported. This was in contrast to Australia where indigenous wine manufacture and drinking became a more integral part of the lifestyle of that country … . New Zealanders’ attitude toward wine underwent a marked change commencing from about thirty years ago … . The population became markedly more knowledgeable on wines and the demand for information was met principally by newspaper columns and books on wine.

Champagne has been exported to New Zealand from about the middle of the last century in small quantities until 1979, and increasingly in the 1980s. It is certain there were quite small volume exports of Australian champagne from 1977 onwards … . New Zealand has, apart from the foregoing, no history of material consumption, or manu-facture, of sparkling wine prior to 1980 … . In about 1981 Montana Wines, Ltd., which is New Zealand’s largest maker, launched a sparkling wine produced by methode champenoise and labeled it “Lindauer New Zealand Champagne.” Proceedings were issued in 1982 against Montana and after four years were settled by a consent order of the Court issuing an injunction generally restraining the use of the word champagne on that defendant’s products.

continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	477



continued



[In Australia,] [s]parkling wine calling itself cham-pagne made from grapes grown in Australia by the methode champenoise, and by other methods, has been entirely accepted and without direct challenge from the CIVC. The plaintiffs recognize, and although reluctantly accept, for Australia, like Canada and the United States of America, there is no legal protection available to them over the use of the appellation champagne.

The sparkling wine market in New Zealand changed dramatically with the introduction here from Australia in 1986 of Yalumba Angas Brut Champagne. The wine was of good quality and reasonably priced. It was a stunning success and other wine importers began a serious search in Australia for competitors … .

It is appropriate here to emphasize the plaintiffs’ view of what makes the product and therefore the name of Champagne so special. The product is a quality one and by virtue of the cost of manufacture it is necessarily expensive, which is part of its exclusivity. From the quality product the reputation has developed, which reflects the specialness of the wine itself arising from factors outlined above. Whilst it has developed a reputation as a quality sparkling wine, the consumption of it has also become widely associated with certain types of human activity that are mobilized around celebration and joy. Champagne is appropriate as a wine with which to celebrate (a characteristic is that it palpably agitates in the glass) and that is reinforced by exotic origin (for all but the French) and its cost. The plaintiffs say the excellent wine, whose quality is secured by the law of France, is rolled up with its deserved reputation and the name is a valuable right to them as owners … .

It is appropriate here to deal with a phenomenon which is occurring in Australia … whereby [s]parkling wines at the lower end of the price range not made from the classic Champagne grape varieties and using the transfer method are continued to be called champagne but those at the upper end of the price range made by methode champenoise are tending not to be called champagne, but given a brand name with the label showing it was produced by methode champenoise. That trend clearly suggests that the word champagne has been so devalued in the market in Australia that the public now needs a word, or words, that will convey the excitement and quality surround-ing the word champagne say in New Zealand or the United Kingdom.

What the defendant [says] is that the word cham-pagne has in New Zealand lost its distinctive signifi-

cance so as to be properly defined now as a generic term having generic use within the wine market … .

The task of the Court is to decide how the adult population of New Zealand as a group perceives the word. One has only to frame the task in that way to demonstrate its immense difficulty.

The Court holds [market research] studies support-ing the contention that there is significant evidence that champagne is not a generic word by usage in New Zealand … . From the evidence of the wine experts emerged two other observations worth making. If Australian wine interests were able to export sparkling wines to New Zealand it would have overall a deleteri-ous effect by setting back the desirable goal of attainment of the maximum accuracy and fair labeling on wine bottles … . The countries who are members of the Common Market strictly adhere to France’s propri-etary right in the word Champagne … . There was a conscious attempt to supply [restaurant wine] lists encompassing a wide range of restaurants from the select and expensive ones downwards … the great majority make the distinction between sparkling wines and Champagne. [T]he Court’s decision is that the word champagne in New Zealand is not generically used to describe any white sparkling wine.

The word champagne does, in my view, have a special impact or impression on ordinary, average New Zealanders for whom wine drinking generally plays no significant part in their lives. This nonexpert, phlegmatic, even uninterested representative New Zealander does have a definite response to the word champagne over and above noting it to be a white sparkling wine, or one with bubbles in it. That response if pushed to articulation might be, a wine for celebration, expensive, of French origin, special method of manufacture, name of district in France, consumed by a certain social class, a wine ships are launched with or crowds are sprayed with after a major sporting event is won … .

The question for the Court is whether importation into New Zealand, as aforesaid by the defendant advertising and selling Seaview Champagne, is decep-tive in the way complained of by the plaintiffs. The Court’s decision is that it is deceptive. To begin with the finding of the Court is that the word champagne is distinctive and that in New Zealand it has not passed into generic territory. Having found it is not generic then to use it in the market previously described is deceptive … . By using the word champagne on the label the defendant is deceptively encroaching on the reputation and goodwill of the plaintiffs.

continues




Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




continued

Decision.   The court enjoined the Australian defen-	2.	The  court  reached  its  decision  by  reviewing
dants  from  using  the  word  champagne  in  New		evidence  about  association  between  the  word
Zealand.		champagne and the product from France. Such
Case Questions		surveys were organized and conducted by experts
		for  each  of  the  parties.  Were  these  surveys
1.  The result in this case means that “champagne” is		subjective or objective? Whose job is it to deter-
an enforceable IPR in New Zealand and the United		mine which surveys are more reliable?
Kingdom, but not in Australia, Canada, or the	3.	The Coca-Cola Company hires personnel world-
United  States.  Do  you  think  that  the  court’s		wide to assure that when consumers order a
approach was objective or subjective? What does		“coke,” they are either served Coca-Cola products
this suggest about trademark law?		or are advised that none are available. Why?
		


For a time, these worldwide liquor name wars resulted in an armistice of sorts between the United States and the EU. In a bilateral agreement concluded in 1994, the United States agreed to prevent its companies from labeling U.S.-made liquor as Scotch whiskey, Irish whiskey, cognac, Armagnac, Calvados, or brandy de Jerez. In exchange, Europeans may not label European-made products as bourbon or Tennessee whiskey. The debate over trademarks for “geographic indications,” however, grew heated. In October 2003, the WTO agreed to establish a panel to examine EC Council Regulation 2081/92, which creates restrictive rules to protect trade-marks and geographical indications for geographical products and foodstuffs. Regulation 2081/92 does not allow a nation to register its geographical indications in the EU’s Register of Protected Designations of Origin and Protected Geographical Designations (EU’s Geographical Designations Register) unless the nations provide the same enhanced protection as the EU. The United States and Australia each complained separately about the regulation, and in 2003 a single panel was established by the WTO to adjudicate these allegations.

The United States and Australia argued that by not permitting the names of agricultural products from non-EU member countries to be registered without recipro-city in the EU’s Geographical Designations Register, the EU violated its national treatment and most favored nation obligations under the GATT and TRIPS. In addition, the terms of the regulation mean that the EU did not grant the advantages that EU products receive to products of non-EU member countries. For example, EC Council Regulation 2081/92 granted certain monitoring and enforcement benefits to geographical indications of EU members but does not grant the same benefits to non-EU member countries.

In a report formally issued in early 2005, the WTO panel agreed with some of the arguments the United

States and Australia made. The panel held that the EC’s regulatory system failed to provide national treatment to non-EC nations, but only to the extent that it required non-EC nations to (1) adopt a system of GI protection equivalent to the EC’s system and offer reciprocal protection to EC GIs and (2) have applications and objections from citizens of non-EC members examined and transmitted by the govern-ments of those members and required those govern-ments to operate systems of product inspection equivalent to EC nations. In April 2006, the EC implemented new regulations, which it claimed brought the EC into full compliance with its obliga-tions under TRIPS. The United States and Australia continue to maintain that further reforms are required to fully address the WTO panel requirements. The geographical indications war rages on.

Geographical Indications under the Doha Development Agenda

The battle of geographical indications is not limited to the developed worlds of North America, Australia, and Europe and is not limited to wines and liquors. The Development Agenda of the Doha Ministerial Conference included two issues relating to geographi-cal indications: (1) creating a multi-register for wines and spirits and (2) extending the higher or enhanced level of protection accorded to wines and spirits under TRIPS to other products.

The negotiations for the creation of a multi-register for geographical indications for wines and spirits are required under TRIPS and the Doha Declaration.

There are two main arguments in the negotiations. On one hand, countries led by the United States, Argentina, Australia, and Japan propose a voluntary system where notified geographical indications would


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	479




be registered in a database. Under this proposal, governments choosing to participate would have to consult the database when making decisions on protection in their countries. Countries that do not wish to participate would simply be “encouraged” but not “obliged” to consult the database. In contrast, the so called “EU proposal” suggests that the registration would establish a “presumption” that the geographical indication is to be protected in all countries. The presumption of protection can be challenged on certain grounds, but once a name or term has been registered, a nation can no longer refuse protection to the registered name or term unless the name or term is challenged within 18 months from registration.

A number of countries, including EU member-states, China, Thailand, Pakistan, and Nigeria, have requested extending the enhanced protection given to wines and spirits by TRIPS to other products. They argue that a key component of the value of certain agricultural products (such as basmati rice and Parma ham) is the well-established link to the regions where these goods are produced. As in the case of wines and spirits, the demand for these products provides opportunities for producers from those regions. To protect these producers from usurpation, the exten-sion advocates argue that safeguards similar to those of wines and spirits need to be in place.

The opponents of the extension—including the United States, Japan, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand—argue that the existing level of protection under Article 22 of TRIPS is adequate and that providing the enhanced protection would be expensive to enforce. The opponents of enhanced protection also argue that the usurpation claim is flawed, especially since the world has seen a great number of immigrants taking the methods of producing or making these products with them to their new home countries. In July 2006, the general council of the WTO suspended the Doha Round of negotiations, citing a failure of the parties involved to draw any closer to consensus on the issues before it, including extending the broader protection of Article 23 to all geographical indications. There has been little progress since then.

Continuing TRIPS Turmoil on Biodiversity

As we have seen, the patenting of living organisms was controversial even in the United States. Beginning in 1999, the TRIPS Council commenced its review of Article 27.3 of TRIPS, which relates to biotechnologi-cal inventions. Article 27.3 of TRIPS permits countries



to exclude plants, animals, and biological processes from patent protection. (Microorganisms and nonbi-ological and microbiological processes are eligible for patents.) However, Article 27.3(b) requires member countries to provide for the protection of plant varieties either by patents, through a system created specifically for that purpose (sui generis), or by a combination of both.

The TRIPS Council’s discussions include a variety of controversial topics. First, the council addressed the modification of existing TRIPS provisions on the patentability or nonpatentability of plant and animal inventions. Second, the council addressed the inter-pretation of effective protection for new plant varieties, including a discussion on the effects of other laws such as the International Union for the Protection of New Variety of Plants. Third, it focused on the handling of certain moral and ethical issues such as the extent to which invented life forms should be eligible for patent protection. Finally, the council considered the issue of traditional knowledge and genetic material, and the rights of communities or countries where this knowledge or genetic material originates.

A key topic under consideration by the TRIPS Council is whether TRIPS conflicts with the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). Those who argue that a conflict exists claim that while the CBD appears to grant sovereignty in biological resources to the countries that possess them, TRIPS permits these resources to be patented. Consequently, there is currently a dispute as to whether rights and benefits given to the resource holders under the CBD are taken away by TRIPS.

In November 2001, the Doha Declaration linked the issues of biotechnology, biodiversity, and tradi-tional knowledge and declared that further work by the TRIPS Council on these reviews should be guided by the TRIPS objectives and principles and must take development into account.

Since the Doha Ministerial Conference, a number of proposals have been submitted for dealing with these complex subjects on biodiversity. On October 17, 2002, the EU submitted a paper that included a proposal to examine the requirement that patent applicants disclose the origin of genetic material. Switzerland submitted a proposal on May 28, 2003, suggesting an amendment to WIPO’s Patent Coopera-tion Treaty, which in essence would require domestic law to ask patent applicants to disclose the origins of genetic resources and traditional knowledge. Under


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

480Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




this proposal, a failure to disclose required informa-tion could delay the grant of patent protection or affect its validity.

Similar proposals have been submitted by nations that are home to biological resources. A paper submitted by Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, India, Peru, and Venezuela in June 2003 developed earlier proposals on disclosure of the origins of biological resources. This led to the six nations advancing, in May 2006, a proposal to add a new Article 29bis to the TRIPS agreement. Under this amendment, it would become mandatory to disclose in patent application forms the source of biological resources and associated tradi-tional knowledge to show that authorization has been given for this use and to show that the applicant has entered into a benefit-sharing arrangement with the source of the biological resources. Many EU nations support this suggestion.

Several other developed countries—particularly the United States, the residence of most owners of pharmaceutical IPRs—have opposed these provisions. These countries argue that further legislation on these subjects is not necessary because these issues can be adequately addressed in contractual agreements between the researching entities and the communities that own these genetic materials and traditional knowledge. Private pharmaceutical entrepreneurs are less circumspect: They characterize the proposal as little more than an attempt by Third World elites to profit without making real contributions. Indeed, emerging nations loudly complain about the potential that biopiracy will develop as pharmaceutical firms take evasive action. The outcome of this conflict remains to be seen.

NONENFORCEMENT OF IPR LAWS
.......................................................................

As seen throughout this book, the varying attitudes of nations are generally reflected in their laws. However, in the IPR context, TRIPS now mandates what each country’s laws must say. Attitudes in this context are now more accurately reflected in how the words of these laws are actually enforced.

It is one thing to enact laws as TRIPS requires and quite another to enforce them. Industrialized emerg-ing countries often have panoply of laws designed to protect domestic and foreign IPRs but fail to enforce the laws or do not have adequate procedures to enable



foreign parties to enforce them. After NAFTA, for example, Mexico adopted most internationally accepted standards with respect to IPRs. Yet to this day, Mexico City streets are littered with pirated music CDs and videos because Mexico has not devoted many of its scarce resources to enforcing those laws.

Still other nations enforce their laws in a discrimi-natory fashion so that foreign parties do not have confidence that their rights will be vindicated against clear infringement. Indeed, some nations tacitly encourage piracy of such IPRs by their citizens. In South Korea, the government once published details of pharmaceutical and pesticide formulations to facilitate their copying by locals.

After a great deal of prodding from developed nations, the Chinese government enacted modern copyright infringement legislation and even created special IPR tribunals. But in the meantime, China allowed construction of 26 compact disc plants with the capacity to manufacture more than 50 million CDs per year, despite the fact that China had a relatively small number of consumers who can purchase CDs and that virtually no Western companies had licensed the reproduction of their products in China. A particularly flagrant violation occurred in 1994, when a relative of the Chinese premier opened a huge laser disk and compact disc factory with the capacity to manufacture 5.5 million CDs and 1.5 million laser disks per year. Despite open violations of the ostensible IPR protection laws, Chinese authorities refused to permit even an inspection of the facility by Westerners.

This piracy is very big business. The FBI has estimated that U.S. businesses lose over $250 billion per year to counterfeit goods. In recent years, the U.S. government and leaders of its domestic high-tech and entertainment industries have focused a great deal of attention on the interrelation between the quality of foreign intellectual property protection and the vitality of U.S. trade in foreign countries and, indeed, the U.S. domestic market. In 1979, international firms from developed nations joined to form the International Anti-Counterfeiting Coalition, a trade group that pressures governments to enforce IPR laws, and the group has grown exponentially in recent years. At the urging of these industry groups, the U.S. government has become active in promoting the adoption and effective enforcement of intellectual property laws by its various trading partners. As noted previously, the TRIPS Agreement requires WTO countries to ensure that IPR laws are enforced and to call for the seizure of


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	481




goods infringing on IPR rights. A failure to enforce such laws now can give rise to a WTO trade proceeding. Taiwan, once an internationally notorious haven of piracy, largely eliminated piracy after the United States was on the verge of enacting retaliatory tariffs on Taiwanese products. When the United States threatened to block hundreds of millions of Brazilian products from entering the United States, the govern-ment of Brazil agreed to a strict timetable for implementing patent and copyright reforms. U.S. movie industry officials, in partnership with the U.S. government, have used the threat of Super 301 trade proceedings, discussed below, against Italian products to prod Italian officials into more diligent enforcement of its copyright laws.

In April 2007, the United States filed two complaints with the World Trade Organization against the People’s Republic of China for its “unfair trade practices,” centering on “deficiencies in China’s legal regime for protecting and enforcing copyrights and trademarks.” In other words, after years of attempting to persuade the Chinese to police their rampant piracy and counterfeiting of U.S. entertainment products, it decided to initiate hostilities. The United States argued that Chinese laws actually impeded the legitimate distribution of such products, which further increased the demand for pirated products.

In addition to the TRIPS Agreement and the WTO dispute settlement proceedings, countries can combat IPR violations and copyright piracy through other means. Under Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, each year, the Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR) issues the Special 301 Report, which is an annual review of the global state of intellectual property rights. For instance, the 2013 Special 301 Report maintains China on the Priority Watch List and states that China will continue to be subject to Section 306 monitoring. In particular, the 2013 Special 301 Report recognizes that China has increased its IPR enforcement efforts but also notes that issues of widespread piracy and “the apparent growth of trade secret theft” remain. In addition, the United States can use the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCCT) to get results on IPR protection and enforcement. As a result of past JCCT commitments, China introduced rules that require computers to be preinstalled with licensed operating system software, agreed to step up work to combat counterfeit goods at trade fairs and consumer markets, and joined the WIPO Internet Treaties, which are critical to ensuring IP protection in the digital age.



The Proposed Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement

In 2006, Japan and the United States began confiden-tial discussions related to a new plurilateral treaty to help in the fight against counterfeiting and piracy. The aim was to bring together countries that are interested in fighting counterfeiting and piracy and to negotiate an agreement that enhances international cooperation and contains international standards for enforcing intellectual property rights. Preliminary talks about such an anti-counterfeiting trade agreement took place throughout 2006 and 2007 among an initial group of interested parties (Canada, the European Union, Japan, Switzerland, and the United States). Negotiations started in June 2008 with the participation of a broader group of participants (Australia, Canada, the European Union and its 27 member-states, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Switzerland, and the United States).

The Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) would establish a new international legal framework that countries can join on a voluntary basis and would create its own governing body outside existing international institutions such as the WTO and WIPO. Negotiating countries have described it as a response “to the increase in global trade of counterfeit goods and pirated copyright protected works.” As negotiations have progressed, partial drafts of the agreement have become public. The U.S. government published a partial draft for public release in April 2010. The scope of ACTA is broad and would call for cooperation among member-states and civil and criminal enforcement of intellectual property laws that protect patent, industrial design, trademark, and copyright or related rights. As one example, member-states would enforce laws and cooperate to prevent cross-border distribution of pirated movies and music over the Internet. At the time of this writing, negotiations related to ACTA are ongoing.

THE MECHANICS OF IPR TRANSFER REGULATIONS
.......................................................................

Three basic types of regulatory schemes provide the format for IPR transfer agreements. They range from preapproval to notification-registration to no regula-tion. The third scheme is obviously the most beneficial to the U.S. entrepreneur. But because the absence of law would be uninteresting to legal scholars, this


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

482Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




section focuses on the preapproval and registration-notification systems in selected countries.

Prior-Approval Schemes

Requiring substantive prior approval from a govern-ment agency is a more intrusive type of regulatory scheme. It is indicative of a relatively protectionist government policy. The degree to which such a scheme intrudes on private enterprise depends largely on the attitude and mandate of the relevant regulatory agencies.

Some prior-approval schemes delegate specific types of authority to government entities and contain relatively objective standards. In others, the laws are written in general terms and vest broad interpretive powers in the bureaucracy. Some nations call for the exercise of this discretion by giving government officials a broad range of reasons for disapproving a transfer of technology. The Royalties Committee in Colombia could refuse to register a technology transfer agreement if the proposed license continued confidentiality obligations after its term or if the term extended for more than three to five years.

Other countries have taken an approach that depends even more on discretion: All transfer-of-technology agreements are prohibited unless a specific reason can be found for them to be permitted. The Japanese gensoku kinshi (prohibited in principle) system was a good example. In this system, transac-tions were presumed to be prohibited, but there were some exemptions. These exemptions were not based on law, but instead reflected an evolving bureaucratic tradition that decided what transactions should be exempt. Therefore, a foreign investor could only obtain key “legal” insights from someone familiar with the personalities who administered the process.

These discretionary systems make it easy for a government to reject requests for technology transfers by mere delay. In its heyday, the Japanese approval mechanism held up for more than four years a request for a technology transfer by Texas Instruments, Inc., to a proposed Texas Instruments subsidiary in Japan. While Texas Instruments was stalemated, Japanese competitors were able to develop technologies that would help them combat the Americans once they arrived. Many other foreign companies that were not as dogged as Texas Instruments were simply driven away by delay.

Delay is also used to deter technology transfers that require a patent. For instance, in some Latin American



countries, the patent process sometimes took eight years from start to finish. During that entire period, there was an embargo on all fees payable to the owner of the patent.

Notification-Registration Schemes

A notification-registration system is more open to technological transfer. The Japanese gensoku kinshi (prohibited in principle) system transformed over time into the gensoku jiyu (free in principle) system. Similar instances may be found in South Korea, Venezuela, and Mexico, where prior-approval schemes have been replaced by a simple registration procedure. Countries with a general system of notification often make exceptions for areas of heightened concern, such as technology agreements between foreign companies and their controlled subsidiaries. Because of the patent inequality in bargaining position in such situations, many countries with a notification-registration system will still require specific approval of technology transfer agreements between such companies.

Adanger in notification-registration countries is that some provisions of a registered contract might not be enforceable under a country’s laws. License royalties in a given contract might be retroactively ruled excessive and recharacterized as taxable income to the foreign company. For instance, in some Chinese special economic zones, the foreign investor must compensate the local licensee for losses it incurs on sales of products manufactured by the transferred technology.

A significant danger in any approval-notification system is the risk that the government bureaucracy can make an unauthorized disclosure of the foreign party’s intellectual property. Some commentators have suggested that, notwithstanding its advanced IPR protection laws, Mexico is not acquiring the most modern industrial technology because foreign inves-tors do not wish to risk piracy of their IPRs. In Japan, foreign investors cast a wary eye on the Japanese government’s continuing requirements for specificity in describing transferred technology under its notifi-cation system. Although Japanese authorities respond that they need such information for statistical purposes and that any disclosure by a government official could lead to criminal sanctions, foreign investors remain concerned about possible leaks from government ministries to Japanese firms.

A relevant provision of U.S. trade law is Section 337 of the Tariff Act, which took its current form in 1974.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	483




Among other things, Section 337 prohibits the importation of articles that infringe a U.S. patent, trademark, or copyright. For example, if someone tries to import fake Rolex watches into the United States from a country that does not enforce its IPR laws, the Rolex trademark holder may seek to exclude the fakes through Section 337. The International Trade Com-mission (ITC), an independent, quasi-judicial federal agency, carries out investigations under this provision upon the filing of a complaint by the trademark holder or by the ITC on its own initiative. Under Section 337, the complainant must establish that its trademark is being infringed and that it has a “domestic industry” that uses the trademark (for example, a business that distributes and sells genuine Rolex watches in the United States). If the ITC determines that an article is being imported in violation of Section 337, it can issue

alimited-exclusion order (excluding some of the items in question) or a general-exclusion order (excluding all of the items in question). Under Section 337, the president can reject or modify an exclusion order issued by the ITC before it becomes final. Once an exclusion order is final, U.S. Customs will attempt to stop the article from entering the United States and may seize inventories of the fakes already in the United States.

The ITC can also exclude a product that has one or more components that infringe a U.S. patent. For example, many cell phones imported into the United States contain semiconductor chips manufactured overseas. An owner of a U.S. patent may allege that the internal operations of one or more of these chips infringe its patent. The patent holder may ask the ITC to institute an investigation into the alleged infringe-ment. If the ITC determines that the accused chips infringe the patent in question, it could issue an order excluding some or all of the cell phones, even though the cell phone companies may have little knowledge about how the chip is made or how it functions internally.

Resolutions of intellectual property disputes at the ITC are often much faster than in federal courts, and the ITC has broad power to order discovery overseas (for example, by ordering inspection of foreign plants, production of documents located abroad, or deposi-tions of foreign employees). While a foreign respon-dent (i.e., the accused party) might refuse to comply, the ITC can consider such noncompliance when it determines whether it will issue an exclusion order. As can be seen, Section 337 is a powerful tool for preventing importation of goods that infringe a U.S.



trademark, patent, or copyright. Certain foreign governments have raised concerns that Section 337 may be used in a discriminatory fashion to protect particular industries or companies in the United States or favor certain foreign companies over others. After TRIPS was accepted by other nations effective in 1995, Congress amended Section 337 in the Uruguay Round Agreement Act to respond to concerns about allegedly discriminating aspects of Section 337.

THE GRAY MARKET
.......................................................................

As noted earlier, a prospective U.S. licensor fears that the IPR that it licenses abroad may come back into its home market to compete with the licensor’s goods. After a license’s anti-competition restrictions expire, the licensee might take the product it makes with the IPR and invade the U.S. market. But even before that occurs, a licensor must contemplate the danger that a completely unrelated party with whom the licensor has no anti-competition agreement will purchase the li-censed product and import it back into the United States. This importation of merchandise produced and sold abroad and then imported back into the United States for sale in competition with the U.S. trademark owner is referred to as the gray market or parallel trade. The products imported back are gray market goods or parallel imports.

The Nature of the Problem

The gray market principally threatens the U.S. licensor if the product is sold at a lower price abroad than in the United States. This can happen for a variety of reasons. The U.S. licensor might have established such a reputation for quality in the U.S. market that it can command a substantial premium for its product there. But until its product builds a similar reputation abroad, the licensor will not be able to charge a similar premium. In the meantime, the gray marketer could purchase the goods abroad more cheaply, transport them back to the United States, and place them in direct competition with the U.S. licensor.

The gray market is also stimulated by international currency fluctuations. Relative currency values vary minute by minute during each business day. Retailers and wholesalers of goods are much slower to react, however. If the Canadian dollar goes down in value relative to the U.S. dollar, a nimble arbitrageur can purchase the U.S. product in Canada at a price that is a bargain in U.S. dollars.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

484Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




Holders of trademarks oppose the gray marketers. They note that some products sold abroad under their trademarks are actually different from the domestic products. For instance, soft drinks sold in the Far East are sweetened more than their U.S. counterparts. U.S. licensors argue that sale of the foreign product in the United States could have a detrimental impact on the reputation of their domestic product.

U.S. licensors also argue that gray marketers receive a “free ride” on their U.S. marketing efforts. They point out that they make a substantial investment in time, effort, and capital to develop the sort of reputation that commands a premium in the U.S. market. Consequently, they argue, the gray marketer who comes in without making any payment to the U.S. trademark holder is stealing some of the return on the holder’s investment.

Consumers, on the other hand, are generally delighted by the gray market. It often enables them to obtain goods of the same or comparable quality as well-known brands at a lower price. U.S. consumer advocates and merchan-dise retailers favor the gray market.




Resolution of the Dispute

In this hotly debated area, courts have gone in a variety of directions. National legislatures, including the U.S. Congress, are often called upon to provide assistance to one side or the other in the struggle.

Under one view, the trademark holder has no right to control goods after it sells them in commerce. After such a sale, the trademark holder has exhausted its control, and once its control is exhausted, the trademark holder cannot complain of competition by others. The exhaustion doctrine, if pursued to its logical end, would create a wide-open gray market.

Courts seem to have accepted the proposition that if a gray market product is so different as to call into question the quality of the domestic product, the licensor should be granted relief, especially if the seller of the domestic product has independently developed goodwill in its home country. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote one of the opinions that formed the foundation for analysis in this area.


A. Bourjois & Co. v. Katzel

360 U.S. 689 (1923) United States Supreme Court


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

A French cosmetic company with a business in the United States sold that business to a U.S. company, A. Bourjois & Co., along with its trademark for face powder. A. Bourjois reregistered the trademark and continued with the face powder business, using the same box and trademark for the product. Katzel bought a quantity of the same powder in France and sold it in the United States in boxes closely resembling the A. Bourjois boxes, but with its own labels. The plaintiff, A. Bourjois, sued for copyright infringement. It sought a preliminary injunction restraining the defen-dant from infringing its copyrights.

JUSTICE HOLMES

In 1913 A. Bourjois & Cie., E. Wertheimer & Cie., Successeurs, doing business in France and also in the United States, sold the plaintiff for a large sum their business in the United States, with their good will and their trade marks registered in the Patent Office. The latter related particularly to face powder, and included the above words. The plaintiff since its purchase has registered them again and goes on with the business that it bought, using substantially the same form of box and label as its predecessors and importing its face powder from France. It uses care in selecting colors

suitable for the American market, in packing and in keeping up the standard, and has spent much money in advertising, so that the business has grown very great and the labels have come to be understood by the public here as meaning goods coming from the plaintiff. The boxes have upon their backs: “Trade Marks Reg. U.S. Pat. Off. Made in France—Packed in the U.S.A. by A. Bourjois & Co., Inc., of New York, Succ’rs. in the U.S. of A. Bourjois & Cie., and E. Wertheimer & Cie.”

The defendant, finding that the rate of exchange enabled her to do so at a profit, bought a large quantity of the same powder in France and is selling it here in the French boxes which closely resemble those used by the plaintiff except that they have not the last quoted statement on the backs, and that the label reads, “Poudre de Riz de Java,” whereas the plaintiff has found it advisable to strike out the suggestion of rice powder and has “Poudre Java” instead. There is no question that the defendant infringes the plaintiff’s rights unless the fact that her boxes and powder are the genuine product of the French concern gives her a right to sell them in the present form.

After the sale the French manufacturers could not have come to the United States and have used their

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	485



continued



old marks in competition with the plaintiff … . If for the purpose of evading the effect of the transfer, it has arranged with the defendant that she should sell with the old label, we suppose that no one would doubt that the contrivance must fail. There is no such conspiracy here, but, apart from the opening of a door to one, the vendors could not convey their goods free from the restriction to which the vendors were subject … . It deals with a delicate matter that may be of great value but that easily is destroyed, and therefore should be protected with corresponding care. It is said that the trademark here is that of the French house and truly indicates the origin of the goods. But that is not accurate. It is the trademark of the plaintiff only in the United States and indicates in law, and, it is found, by public understanding, that the goods come from the plaintiff although not made by it. It was sold and could only be sold with the good will of the business that the plaintiff bought. It takes

the reputation of the plaintiff upon the character of the goods.

Decision. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed the deci-sion of the U.S. Court of Appeals not to grant the plain-tiff, A. Bourjois, a preliminary injunction.

Case Questions

1.Certain German automobiles that are regarded as non-luxury in Germany have upgraded options before shipment to the United States, where they are marketed by U.S. licensees as luxury cars. How would this business model be adversely affected if not for the Bourjois decision?

2.How does the protection afforded by Bourjois hurt U.S. consumers?

3.If the Bourjois protection were not afforded, what would this mean for U.S. licensees of products from outside the United States?



In situations with relatively little possibility of confusion, in which the quality of the gray market product is indistinguishable from the domestic product, U.S. courts have not been solicitous of the rights of licensors. In such cases, courts prize the benefits of price competition over concerns about a free ride for the gray marketer. More recent Supreme Court cases confirm this trend, favoring gray market forces where there is little chance of confusion. In K Mart Corp. v. Cartier, Inc., 486 U.S. 281 (1988), the U.S. Supreme Court allowed the entry of gray market imports as long as the foreign manufacturer and the domestic trademark owner were subject to common control.

The European Court of Justice has charted a different course. In the cases of Sebago Inc. v. GB Unie, SA, [1999] E.T.M.R. 681 and Silhouette Interna-tional Schmied GmbH & Co. KG v. Hartlauer Handelsge-sellschaft mbH, [1999] E.C.R. 1-4799, the ECJ interpreted the EU’s Trademark Directive to permit reimport from one Union country to another, but to forbid reimport from other countries into the European Union. This “regional trademark exhaus-tion” principle was calculated to protect free access to markets within the Union while protecting the integrity of the common market from nonmembers. Other nations, led by Australia, have charted yet another course. Australia advocates the principle of “international exhaustion,” meaning free reimport whether or not there is a danger of confusion. The


Australians argue that rights to trade are part of the property purchased. Therefore, the purchaser should be free to trade its property regardless of where it finds the buyer.

The parallel import issue was purposefully left open in the TRIPS agreement. The divisions among nations are too wide to permit comprehensive agreement in the foreseeable future. Until the future day when agreement is reached, the exporter must simply inform itself of the law in the area to which it is sending product.


FRANCHISING: LICENSING OUTSIDE THE TECHNOLOGICAL CONTEXT
.......................................................................

Franchising seldom involves technological complexity. It is an arrangement in which the licensor permits the licensee to sell certain goods under the licensor’s trade-mark or service mark under a franchising agreement. To prevent devaluation of its trademark, the licensor will typically condition its use on the licensee’s obser-vance of certain quality standards. A Muscovite who wishes to open a McDonald’s restaurant will contract with McDonald’s Corporation for a franchise. A condi-tion of the franchise might be that the franchisee must follow specified processes in cooking hamburgers.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

486Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




Several observations may be made about franchises:

1.Although franchising seldom involves significant patent law or other technological issues, many of the considerations noted in other licensing contexts apply with equal force. Often, the franchiser will only keep renewing a franchise if the franchisee meets defined marketing quotas. The franchisee will attempt to obtain exclusive rights within some geographic area, while the franchiser will resist granting such rights or will try to narrow the geographic area. Franchisers must make the same balancing considerations as other licensors in arriving at an appropriate royalty level and duration for the franchise.

2.While patent law protection is generally not a significant issue in franchising, trademark protec-tion is a big issue. Often the most valuable asset that the franchisee purchases is the right to use the franchiser’s good name and trademarks on other wise local products. If trademark protection or enforcement is lax in the local jurisdiction, the value of the franchise accordingly declines.

3.Competition laws have greatly affected a number of franchising issues. For instance, the European Commission has invalidated franchisers’ quality assurance provisions when they were deemed unduly restrictive of the franchisee’s ability to compete. Franchisers must also be concerned about the application of competition laws to tied-purchase clauses in franchise contracts. These clauses require the franchisee to buy certain goods from the franchiser. Such provisions are some-times difficult to justify on quay control grounds. Courts will also deny geographic exclusivity if it unduly restricts competition within the host country.

4.Because franchisees typically sell to the local domestic market and generate few exports, franchisers face special difficulties repatriating profits from soft currency countries. This problem is often solved by creating hard currency sections within franchise stores where you can buy the same products for hard currency at relatively favorable exchange rates. Even if hard currency transactions are a small part of the total sales, as long as they are equal to the franchisee’s payments due to the franchiser, they can largely relieve the problem.

Another approach has been to make countertrade payments to the franchiser with goods instead



of hard currency. PepsiCo, Inc., is partially paid for its cola products by its Russian co-venturers with mushrooms for the pizzas of PepsiCo’s Pizza Hut subsidiary. The potential for counter-trade is limited in most soft currency countries because goods from such nations are often not competitive with those from hard currency countries.

5.A few nations have a number of laws that are specifically directed at the franchising phenome-non. The franchiser must be alert for franchise tax laws, which can impose taxes based on the franchiser’s worldwide operations even if its local operations fizzle. A business may sometimes avoid such taxes by structuring the franchise agreement in accordance with local preferences.

6.System franchisers—those with a prepackaged program of instruction and initiation for prospec-tive franchisees—should be careful to avoid the entanglements of language politics. This term describes the situation, found in regions of a few countries, where laws require that companies conduct business in a certain language. A promi-nent example is in the province of Quebec in Canada, where the law requires that business be done in French. A U.S. franchiser that brings its standard English-language package into such an area may be subject to significant civil penalties.

Finally, some nations impose stringent disclosure requirements on who may be a franchiser and what must be disclosed to prospective franchisees. These restrictions include registration requirements and highly detailed disclosure requirements under which a franchiser must reveal information about its business that it may not wish to make known.

ANTITRUST CONSIDERATIONS
.......................................................................

IPRs can sometimes allow a company to monopolize a market. Thus, there is a tension between antitrust laws and intellectual property laws, because antitrust laws seek to foster competition in the marketplace and to elim-inate monopolies while intellectual property laws can provide inventors with a legal monopoly. In the 1970s, the United States Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and the Department of Justice (DOJ) subjected IPRs to strin-gent scrutiny and prohibited certain IPR arrangements including: mandatory package licensing (also known as patent pools), tying of unpatented supplies, compulsory


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	487




payment of royalties in amounts not reasonably related to sales of the patented product, and mandatory grant-backs. In the 1990s, however, the FTC and DOJ aban-doned most of these rules and indicated that intellectual property should be treated no differently than other forms of property, patents do not necessarily confer mar-




ket power, and licensing is generally procompetitive. The Federal Circuit has supported this exclusion of antitrust principles from the world of intellectual property. It is this exemption that has, in the first two decades of the twenty-first century, fueled the explosion of IPR accumu-lation by major companies.


In re Independent Service Organizations Antitrust
Litigation CSU et al. v. Xerox Corporation

203 F.3d 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2000)


BACKGROUND

CSU sued Xerox, claiming that the copier manufac-turer’s refusal to sell patented parts and copyrighted manuals and to license copyrighted software violated antitrust laws. The district court granted summary judgment in favor of the copier manufacturer, and CSU appealed. The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held that the copier manufacturer’s refusal to sell or license its patented parts did not violate antitrust laws.


CHIEF JUDGE HALDANE ROBERT MAYER

Intellectual property rights do not confer a privilege to violate the antitrust laws. But it is also correct that the antitrust laws do not negate the patentee’s right to exclude others from patent property. The commercial advantage gained by new technology and its statutory protection by patent does not convert the possessor thereof into a prohibited monopolist. The patent right must be ‘coupled with violations of § 2,’ and the elements of violation of 15 U.S.C. § 2 must be met. Determination of whether the patentee meets the Sherman Act elements of monopolization or attempt to monopolize is governed by the rules of application of


the antitrust laws to market participants, with due consideration to the exclusivity that inheres in the patent grant.

The patentee’s right to exclude, however, is not without limit. As we recently observed, a patent owner who brings suit to enforce the statutory right to exclude others from making, using, or selling the claimed invention is exempt from the antitrust laws, even though such a suit may have an anticompetitive effect, unless the infringement defendant proves one of two conditions. First, he may prove that the asserted patent was obtained through knowing and willful fraud. Or he may demonstrate that the infringement suit was a mere sham to cover what is actually no more than an attempt to interfere directly with the business relationships of a competitor.


Case Questions

1.Is there a conflict between antitrust laws and IPR laws? If so, how can such a conflict be resolved by the legislature or the courts?

2.Should the courts or the legislatures impose a duty to license to prevent a company to monopo-lize a market?


CONCLUSION
.......................................................................

In a world dominated by technological and design in-novation, intellectual property rights have become vital to many companies’ very existence. Companies are in-vesting in research and development and in flooding overburdened and under-sophisticated governmental authorities with IPR requests in order to obtain IPRs to dominate the markets in which they compete. And litigation of conflicting IPRs has become a normal cost of doing business. It is not clear whether the existing and sometimes outdated IPR governmental and legal framework is adapted to this new reality. Should


governments step in and correct the inefficiencies of litigation, or should companies and the free market correct these inefficiencies themselves? Licensing and cross-licensing provide alternative tools for companies to resolve disputes. They are also less costly and less risky.

Licensing can also allow a firm with intellectual property to increase the IPR’s returns by permitting someone else to exploit it in another market. In the international context, this capability is particularly useful. For example, a U.S. concern with little or no experience in Nepal can contract with someone with such experience to exploit the Nepalese market. In the


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

488Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




normal course, licensor and licensee will negotiate over matters such as conditions and extent of use, compensation, and confidentiality. However, negotia-tions between licensor and licensee are complicated in the international context. Many countries seek to assist local licensees in their efforts to acquire advanced technology. Local legislation may supersede contractual provisions in order to permit host-country nationals to possess the intellectual property more rapidly, while lax enforcement of such legislation can also ease this process. Under some approval systems, nothing is likely to happen without cooperation of a local licensee.

The TRIPS agreement should greatly standardize and improve the situation. After it is fully implemented,



Chapter Summary

1.Intellectual property rights (IPRs) are extremely valuable assets in today’s global economy. Com-panies universally recognize the necessity of investing in research and development to build strong IPRs. Litigation of IPRs in courts is becoming a normal part of competition between companies. They compete in open markets for customers and in courts to obtain the right to exclude each other in the marketplace. Licensing and cross-licensing lessen the risk and cost of litigation and should be pursued aggressively.

2.IPRs are licensed for many business reasons, such as the receipt of royalties or for use in contract manufacturing. IPR licensing agreements are drafted to protect the IPR owner by restricting the licensee’s use of the IPR. Common restrictions include geographical limitations, field of use limitations, and output or customer restrictions. The parties will also negotiate on exclusivity of license, royalty levels, confidentiality, rights to IPR improvements, and termination provisions.

3.The first international property treaty was the International Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, known as the Paris Conven-tion. It guarantees that in each signatory country, foreign trademark and patent applications from other signatory countries receive the same treatment and priority as those from domestic applicants. The Paris Convention has major drawbacks. First, it does not require any



TRIPS should provide minimum standards of intellectual property protection and a reliable worldwide system of enforcement. It will take a while for the parties to work through continuing disagreements on TRIPS implementation.

If all these complications are not bad enough, the U.S. firm that sends goods abroad may find them exported back to its local market. The trend among developed countries has been to permit such increased competition.

Though the logic of efficiency and accelerating technical advances that underlie licensing make it a rapidly expanding—and highly profitable—form of doing business abroad, it is still an endeavor that must be pursued cautiously.






minimum substantive standard of patent protec-tion. Second, it lacks an enforcement mechanism. The Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) supplemen-ted the Paris Convention by establishing a centralized utility patent application process.
4.The European Patent Convention and the Agree-ment Relating to Community Patents created a unitary system for the application and grant of European patents and a uniform system for the resolution of litigation concerning patent infringement.

5.The international treaty system for design patents is the Hague System for the International Registration of Industrial Designs. This system was significantly enhanced by the Geneva Act, which established a single standard application and single design patent filing process in 2003.
6.The Madrid Protocol provides a centralized filing system on a standard form and a designation of the countries in which trademark registration is sought. The WIPO administers trademark prose-cution and notifies designated countries. Many important economic powers have not ratified the Madrid Protocol.

7.The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), which regulates the Internet, has adopted the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP). Under the UDRP, the “first to file” has the right to a domain name, unless the filing is made in “bad


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	489




faith.” “Bad faith” under the UDRP is much easier to show than it generally is at law. In the URDP context, it now includes some negligence without a finding of intent.

8.Under the Berne Convention, each signatory nation must afford foreigners the same copyright protection as its own citizens. The Berne Conven-tion requires all 164 signatory nations to enact certain minimum substantive laws. These laws, known as minima, include prohibitions against copying literary and artistic works and grant authors exclusive rights to adaptations and broad-casts of works. There is no filing requirement.

9.The Draft Treaty on Certain Questions Concern-ing the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works provides that computer programs are protected as literary works under the Berne Convention.

10.The GATT Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), effective




since 2000, obligates its signatories to enact minimum substantive standards of protection for intellectual property rights and to create a viable enforcement mechanism. If one nation believes that another is out of compliance, it can initiate a dispute proceeding before a WTO panel. TRIPS has caused the enactment of IPR protec-tion laws in many countries where the prevailing culture and political elites do not support protection. Thus, many countries with extensive IPR protection laws on the books do little to enforce those laws. Under TRIPS, this has resulted in international proceedings regarding nonen-forcement of IPR laws.

11.The terms gray market and parallel trade refer to the importation of merchandise produced and sold abroad and then imported back into the country of origin for sale in competition with the IPR owner.




Key Terms

intellectual property rights	grant back 464	prior approval 482
(IPRs) 460	right of priority 465	notification-registration 482
fair, reasonable, and	priority claim 466	gray market 483
nondiscriminatory (FRAND) 462	design patent 466	parallel trade 483
royalty 462	biopiracy 466	gray market goods 483
license 462	bad faith 469	parallel imports 483
utility patent 463	cybersquatting 469	franchising 485
field of use limitations 463	copyright 471	tied-purchase clause 486
geographical limitations 463	nonobvious patent 473	countertrade 486
output or customer	useful patent 473	franchise tax 486
restrictions 464	geographical indications 476	language politics 486
exclusive rights 464	counterfeit goods 480	





Questions and Case Problems

1.Hirt Systems Company is a U.S. company that has a strong market in the United States for securing computer terminals. It envelops such terminals with lead to prevent them from emitting microwaves that can be picked up by “spy receivers.” The key to Hirt’s success is its design know-how. Because the application is labor intensive, models produced abroad are significantly cheaper. Hirt has been affected by these lower-priced models, although it has held its own because its design is superior. As part of its






expansion program, Hirt is considering constructing a new assembly plant. Compare the relative benefits and risks of building it as a Hirt-owned concern in a developing country under the direction of Hirt’s U.S. management with building the plant in the United States.

2.Assuming the facts from Question 1, what would be the advantages and disadvantages of a joint venture with a major foreign company abroad compared to the alternatives discussed in Question 1?


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




3.David Wise, a U.S. inventor, has developed and patented a revolutionary new running shoe that increases one’s speed significantly. His invention has achieved considerable success in the Midwestern region of the United States. Two European companies have offered him joint venture packages to take his invention to the track-happy Europeans. Barthelemy Plus Grande, S.A. is a French sportswear giant with a marketing and distribution system that includes every major city in Western Europe and massive capital resources. Pék Társaság, a recently privatized Hungarian firm, offers substantially lower labor costs. Which should Mr. Wise choose as a joint venture partner? Why?

4.Mr. Wise’s marketing experts advise him that the Japanese market is hungry for his shoes. Focusing on technology transfer issues, discuss whether he should seek a Japanese joint venture partner or enter through a wholly owned subsidiary.

5.Analyze the same issues raised in Question 4, but assume Mr. Wise is considering entry into a “prior-approval” country.




6.Laffite Enterprises, Inc., a U.S. firm, has purchased the right to use the trademark of Wellington Imperial, Ltd., in the United States for a high-quality line of Napoleonic War reproductions. Wellington has a cheap line of Napoleonic trinkets that it sells in France. Degas Magazines, S.A., a French firm, begins to import the low-priced Wellington line into the United States. If Laffite brings an action against Degas, how would a U.S. court address the policy considerations presented?

7.Geyer Schokolade, A.G. makes the bonbon of choice for the German yuppie. Its product’s cachet permits Geyer to charge a hefty premium at home. Geyer expands into the U.S. market, where no one has heard of its bonbons, and charges a more reasonable price to garner market share. Henry Joseph, a U.S. entrepreneur, reimports the bonbons into Germany and offers them at a substantial savings below Geyer’s price. What will be the result of Geyer’s attempt to stop Mr. Joseph at the EEC Court of Justice?






Managerial Implications

1.You work for Wilbur Intergalactic, Ltd., a leading North Carolina processor and purveyor of North Carolina-style pork barbecue. Certain areas of North Carolina around Wilson, N.C., are known for produc-ing superior pork barbecue because of the peculiar nature of the soil in which the pigs wallow and because of the method for preparing barbecue developed in that area. Soon, Wilbur Ltd. and other purveyors begin to promote their barbecue pro ducts as “Wilson-Style Barbecue.” In 1999, the North Carolina legislature designates Wilson County as a special barbecue area and prohibits anyone from using the designation “Wilson-Style Barbecue” for barbecue not made from Wilson-bred hogs, in Wilson, pursuant to the Wilson method. Soon thereafter, the Professional Committee of Wilson Barbecue secures the U.S. trademark “Wilson-Style Barbecue” for Limited Wilbur and its other members.

In 2001, Limited Wilbur management learns that at France’s Euro Wally World, a French firm has been selling pork barbecue with the words “Method Wilson” on the label. The barbecue is made from local French hogs, but pursuant to the Wilson method of barbecu-








ing. The committee has not secured trademark protec-tion in France.

a.Explain how a French court would analyze the issue of whether the French barbecuers are infringing on Limited Wilbur’s property rights. In this analysis, discuss whether “Wilson-Style Barbe-cue” is too generic to receive protection and what Limited Wilbur’s rights are under the various intellectual property treaties.
b.Develop a plan for expanding Limited Wilbur’s product marketing to France, giving consideration to steps that it should take to preserve its “Wilson-Style Barbecue” trade name.

2.Undertake a study of the trade war between China and the United States over intellectual property rights. After years of trying to get China to protect American IPRs, an agreement was reached between the two countries in 1992. Reports of copyright and trademark violations continued, and in June 1994, an investigation was initiated under Special 301. China was identified as a priority country in July 1994 (59 FR 35558). A determination was made to take action against China on February 7, 1995 (60 FR 7230). The nation’s press



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	491




covered the story daily, describing how it would cost U.S. consumers billions of dollars per year. China embarked on its own public relations campaign, with U.S. television showing bulldozers crushing thousands of bootlegged and counterfeit CDs on a street in China. A month later, on March 7, 1995, the USTR announced that China had agreed to take the needed action to protect IPRs of U.S. film, recording, and software companies. As shown in this chapter, the United States continues to take the view that China is engaged in massive IPR piracy. In April 2007, the United States initiated two WTO proceedings.

a.What is the annual cost of Chinese IPR violations to U.S. companies? How have IPR violations affected the decision of American companies to do business there? What has been the response of private firms to these violations, and how have they tried to control them?

b.What positive actions has China taken to correct the problem? What new laws have been passed for the protection of IPRs, and how are they enforced?
c.Consider specifically the problems of U.S. software companies in China. Can you find any information about Microsoft’s position on doing business in China? What has been their strategy for tapping into the potentially huge Chinese market, while ensuring that their copyrights on software remain protected? If the Chinese government views IPR violations as a legitimate way to make a profit, would bringing the government in as a joint venture partner be one way to get the Chinese to see the need for IPR protection?




3.L’anza Research, Inc., manufactures high-quality hair care products in California. Copyrighted labels are attached to all products and packaging. In the United States, L’anza sells exclusively to authorized distributors who resell within limited geographic areas and only to authorized retailers such as hair salons. Exports to foreign distributors are sold at a 40 percent discount. L’anza sold three shipments containing several tons of merchandise to its distributor in the United Kingdom, Quality King, who resold them to a buyer in Malta. L’anza later discovered that the products had been resold to a U.S. buyer for less than the wholesale price and were being sold at discounted prices by unautho-rized retailers in California. L’anza complained that because it held the right to the copyrighted language and design of the labels, the unauthorized resale violated U.S. copyright laws. The lower courts agreed. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed, unanimously hold-ing that under the “first sale” doctrine, once a copyright owner places an authentic, copyrighted item in the stream of commerce, it has no further right to control its distribution or reimportation. Thus any lawful purchaser of the products may dispose of them as they please without further obligation. This decision does not apply to counterfeited, pirated, or illegally copied goods shipped into the United States in violation of the copyright or trademark laws. What should L’anza have done to protect itself? Why is a foreign distributorship agreement important? What specific areas of concern should it address? See Quality King Distributors v. L’anza Research Intl. Inc., 523 U.S. 135(1998).





Ethical Considerations

The number of people living with HIV has grown by a factor of 4.5 times since 1990 when approximately 7.5 million people were HIV-positive. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), there were approximately 33 million people living with HIV worldwide in 2008, including 30.8 million adults and 2.2 million children. An additional 2.7 million people are newly infected with HIV every year, which represents a daily new infection rate of 7,397 persons. Two million people die every year as a result of AIDS, which represents a daily death rate of 5,479 persons. Most new infections and deaths are due to inadequate access to HIV prevention and treatment services. As a result, the WHO has







concluded that the HIV pandemic remains the most serious of infectious disease challenges to public health.

The HIV epidemic outside of sub-Saharan Africa, while serious, remains primarily concentrated among at-risk populations, such as men who have sexual relations with other men, drug users, and sex workers and their partners. However, the epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa is generalized throughout all strata of the population. More than 22.5 million people in sub-Saharan Africa, 5 percent of the entire adult population in the region, are infected with HIV, an increase of more than 4.5 million since 2001. Nine states in the region have adult infection rates in excess of 10 percent.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

492Part 4: Regulation of the International Marketplace




These states are Botswana (25.2 percent), Lesotho (23.5 percent), Malawi (12.7 percent), Mozambique (12.5 per-cent), Namibia (15.3 percent), South Africa (16.2 percent), Swaziland (25.9 percent), Zambia (15.6 percent), and Zimbabwe (18.1 percent). By comparison, the highest infection rate in the Western Hemisphere is Haiti at 2.2 percent of the adult population.

Despite declines in the rate of new infections, the death toll as a result of AIDS increased from 1.4 million in 2001 to 1.6 million in 2007. Seventy-six percent of all deaths due to AIDS worldwide occur in sub-Saharan Africa, and more than 25 million people living in the region have perished to date in the pandemic. These deaths have resulted in 11.4 million orphans.

Treatment of people infected with HIV has benefited in recent years with the development of antiretroviral drugs (ARV). ARVs are medications used to treat infections by retroviruses such as HIV. When several such drugs, typically three or four, are taken in combination, the approach is known as highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). HAART first became available in the developed world in 1996 and resulted in an 84 percent drop in the HIV/ AIDS death rate. At a cost of $15,000 per person per year, ARVs were too expensive for the majority of HIV patients in the developing world. Five years after HAART was introduced, fewer than 8,000 people in sub-Saharan Africa were receiving ARVs. Widespread introduction in the developing world could only occur if the price of ARVs was reduced.

In early 2000, an Indian pharmaceutical company began to produce generic ARVs that were identical to the brand name drugs produced by companies in the developed world but significantly cheaper. This sparked a price war between branded and generic drug manufacturers, which resulted in the lowering of prices for ARVs. By June 2001, ARVs were available in generic form from Indian manufacturers for as little as $295. By 2008, the price had fallen to $88 per person per year.

In addition to lowering prices, branded manufacturers of ARVs responded by filing lawsuits against generic manu-facturers. The first such lawsuit to proceed to trial, the so-called “AIDS Medicine Trial,” opened in Johannesburg, South Africa, in March 2001. The Pharmaceutical Manu-facturers’ Association of South Africa and 39 global drug companies filed this action in 1998 challenging a 1997 South African law that permitted the national health minister to ignore patent rights to obtain essential medicines, including ARVs, at cheaper prices through the purchase of generic



alternatives or purchasing name brand drugs in states where they are cheaper.

The pharmaceutical companies abandoned their lawsuit on April 19, 2001, after a wave of bad publicity, including condemnation by the European Parliament and a petition signed by 300,000 people in 130 states denouncing the lawsuit. Later in the month, Merck announced that it would sell two ARVs (Crixivan and Sustiva) in the developing world at a 90 percent discount. The price of Crixivan was subsequently reduced from $6,016 per patient per year to $600, and Sustiva’s price was reduced from $4,730 per patient per year to $500. In addition, GlaxoSmithKline granted a voluntary license to a South African generics manufacturer to share the rights to three of its ARVs (AZT, 3TC, and Com-bivir) without charge.

Despite this progress, continuing success of HIV/ AIDS prevention and treatment programs remains uncertain. In April 2007, United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS estimated that spending would need to increase from $8 billion to $20 billion to make access to ARVs universal. Considering that less than $14 billion was invested in HIV/AIDS programs in 2008, a funding shortfall appears inevitable, especially given economic recession and deepening budget crisis confronting many states. Another financial barrier to universal treatment is that infected individuals who begin taking ARVs must remain on them for the rest of their lives. This places enormous pressures on governments and international organizations to ensure consistent funding for access to ARVs for a period of time that will most likely span several decades. This also places pressure on pharma-ceutical manufacturers who may be confronted by the specter of ARV-immune strains of HIV due to incom-plete or discontinued treatment.

In June 2008, the WHO reported that it had reached its goal set forth in 2002 to guarantee ARV access to three million people infected with HIV in the developing world. More than 2.2 million of these people are located in sub-Saharan Africa. However, only one in ten of the 2.1 million infected children under the age of 15 are receiving ARVs and for every two people who start drug treatment, another five people are infected worldwide. In November 2009, the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative concluded that the HIV pandemic would remain out of control by its 50th anniversary in 2031 unless funding was increased to $35 billion per year. The initiative predicted that the developed world and rapidly developing states such as Brazil, China, India, Mexico, and Russia would be able to finance efforts to






Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 17: Protection and Licensing of Intellectual Property	493




combat their domestic epidemics. However, the vast majority of states in the developing world would remain heavily dependent on the developed world, international organizations, private donors, and pharmaceutical compa-nies to assist in combating the pandemic in the foreseeable future.

1.Applying teleological frameworks for ethical thinking, what is your analysis of the pharmaceutical industry’s behavior prior to and after 2001?




2.Based on teleological frameworks, what is the appro-priate course of action for the industry to take in the future with respect to the ongoing HIV/AIDS crisis?
3.Applying deontological frameworks for ethical think-ing, what is your analysis of the pharmaceutical industry’s behavior prior to and after 2001?
4.Based on deontological frameworks, what is the appropri-ate course of action for the industry to take in the future with respect to the ongoing HIV/AIDS crisis?




















































Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
