
34CHAPTER

Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships



















RESTAURANT, LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA

The Pantry Restaurant in downtown Los Angeles has been open “round the clock” 365 days a year since 1924.






Learning Objectives


After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

1.Define entrepreneurship and describe the types of businesses that an entrepreneur can use to operate a business.

2.Define sole proprietorship and describe the liability of a sole proprietor.

3.Define general partnership and describe how general partnerships are formed and operated.

4.Explain the contract and tort liability of general partners.

5.Describe how a general partnership is dissolved and terminated.





























Chapter Outline



Introduction to Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships

Entrepreneurship

Sole Proprietorship

CONTEMPORARY ENVIRONMENT Using a “d.b.a.” to

Conduct Business

CASE 34.1 Bank of America, N.A. v. Barr

General Partnership Rights of General Partners Duties of General Partners Liability of General Partners Dissolution of a General Partnership

CONTEMPORARY ENVIRONMENT Right of Survivorship


of General Partners


CHAPTER 34   Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships	565
“One of the most fruitful sources of ruin to a man of the world is the recklessness or want of principle of partners, and it is one of the perils to which every man exposes himself who enters into a partnership.”

—Vice Chancellor Malins

Mackay V. Dou glas, 14 Eq. 106 AT 118 (1872)


Introduction to Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships

A person who wants to start a business must decide whether the business should operate as one of the major forms of business organization—sole proprietorship, general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability company, and corporation—or under other available legal business forms. The selection depends on many factors, including the ease and cost of formation, the capital requirements of the business, the flexibility of management decisions, government restrictions, personal liability, tax considerations, and the like.

This chapter discusses small businesses, entrepreneurship, sole proprietorships, and general partnerships.








It has been uniformly laid down in this Court, as far back as we can remember, that good faith is the basis of all mercantile transactions.

Justice Buller

Salomons v. Nissen (1788)


Entrepreneurship

An entrepreneur is a person who forms and operates a business. An entrepreneur may start a business by himself or herself or may cofound a business with oth-ers. Most businesses started by entrepreneurs are small, although some grow into substantial organizations.

Examples Bill Gates started Microsoft Corporation, which grew into a giant software company. Mark Zuckerberg founded Facebook, a extremely sucessful social network-ing service. Michael Dell started Dell Computer as a mail-order business, which has become a leader in computer sales. David Filo and Jerry Yang founded Yahoo!, which has become a global leader in providing Internet services.

Every day, entrepreneurs in this country and elsewhere around the world cre-ate new businesses that hire employees, provide new products and services, and contribute to the growth of economies of countries.

Entrepreneurial Forms of Conducting Business

Entrepreneurs contemplating starting a business have many options when choosing the legal form in which to conduct the business. Each of these forms of business has advantages and disadvantages for the entrepreneurs. The major forms for conducting businesses and professions are:

•Sole proprietorship

•General partnership

•Limited partnership

•Limited liability partnership

•Limited liability company

•Corporation

Certain requirements must be met to form and operate each of these forms of business. These requirements are discussed in this chapter and the other chap-ters of this unit that follow.

Sole Proprietorship

A sole proprietorship is the simplest form of business organization. There is only one owner of the business, who is called the sole proprietor. There is no separate legal entity. Sole proprietorships are the most common form of business organization



entrepreneur

A person who forms and operates a new business either by himself or herself or with others.













It is when merchants dispute about their own rules that they invoke the law.

Judge Brett

Robinson v. Mollett (1875)









sole proprietorship

A form of business in which the owner is actually the business; the business is not a separate legal entity.

sole proprietor

The owner of a sole proprietorship.


566PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics






















d.b.a.

A designation for a business that is operating under a trade name; it means “doing business as.”

fictitious business name statement

A document that is filed with the state that designates a trade name of a business, the name and address of the applicant, and the address of the business.

in the United States. Many small businesses—and a few large ones—operate in this way.

There are several major advantages to operating a business as a sole propri-etorship. They include the following:

•Forming a sole proprietorship is easy and does not cost a lot.

•The owner has the right to make all management decisions concerning the business, including those involving hiring and firing employees.

•The sole proprietor owns all of the business and has the right to receive all of the business’s profits.

•A sole proprietorship can be easily transferred or sold if and when the owner desires to do so; no other approval (e.g., from partners or shareholders) is necessary.

There are important disadvantages to this business form, too. For example, a sole proprietor’s access to the capital is limited to personal funds plus any loans he or she can obtain, and a sole proprietor is legally responsible for the business’s contracts and the torts he or she or any of his or her employees commit in the course of employment.

Creation of a Sole Proprietorship

Creating a sole proprietorship is easy. There are no formalities, and no federal or state government approval is required. Some local governments require all busi-nesses, including sole proprietorships, to obtain licenses to do business within the city. If no other form of business organization is chosen, the business is by default a sole proprietorship.

The following feature discusses the requirement for businesses to file for a trade name under certain circumstances.





Contemporary Environment

Using a “d.b.a.” to Conduct Business


A sole proprietorship can operate under the name of the sole proprietor or a trade name. For example, the author of this book can operate a sole proprietorship under the name “Henry R. Cheeseman” or under a trade name such as “The Big Cheese.” Operating under a trade name is commonly designated as d.b.a. (doing business as) (e.g., Henry R. Cheeseman, doing business as “The Big Cheese”).
Most states require all businesses—including sole proprietorships, general and limited partnerships, limited liability companies and limited liability partnerships, and corporations—that operate under a trade name to file a


fictitious business name statement (or certificate of trade name) with the appropriate government agency. The state-ment must contain the name and address of the applicant, the trade name, and the address of the business. Most states also require notice of the trade name to be pub-lished in a newspaper of general circulation serving the area in which the applicant does business.
These requirements are intended to disclose the real owner’s name to the public. Noncompliance can result in a fine. Some states prohibit violators from maintaining lawsuits in the state’s courts.





Personal Liability of a Sole Proprietor


unlimited personal liability of a sole proprietor
The personal liability of a sole proprietor for all the debts and obligations of a sole proprietorship.

A sole proprietor bears the risk of loss of the business; that is, the owner will lose his or her entire capital contribution if the business fails. In addition, the sole proprietor has unlimited personal liability (see Exhibit 34.1). Therefore, credi-tors may recover claims against the business from the sole proprietors’ personal assets (e.g., home, automobile, bank accounts).


CHAPTER 34   Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships	567


		Debt or	
Sole	obligation owed	Third
			
				Party
Proprietorship			
				




Capital investment

Exhibit 34.1 SOLE

PROPRIETORSHIP




Sole

Proprietor
(Owner)





Personal liability

for sole proprietorship’s
debts and obligations


Example Nathan opens a clothing store called “The Clothing Store” and operates it as a sole proprietorship. Nathan files the proper statement and publishes the necessary notice of the use of the trade name. Nathan contributes $25,000 of his personal funds to the business and borrows $100,000 from a bank in the name of the business. As-sume that after several months, Nathan closes the business because it is unsuccessful. At the time it is closed, the business has no assets, owes the bank $100,000, and owes other debts of $25,000. Here, Nathan, the sole proprietor, is personally liable to pay the bank and all the debts of the sole proprietorship from his personal assets.

In the following case, the court had to decide the liability of a sole proprietor.


CASE 34.1	Sole Proprietorship

Bank of America, N.A. v. Barr

9 A.3d 816 (2010)

Supreme Judicial Court of Maine


“An individual doing business as a sole proprietor, even when business is done under a different name, remains personally liable for all of the obligations of the sole proprietorship.”

—Alexander, Judge

Facts

Constance Barr was the sole owner of The Stone Scone, a business operated as a sole proprietorship. Based on documents signed by Barr on behalf of The Stone Scone, Fleet Bank approved a $100,000 unsecured small business line of credit for The Stone Scone. Fleet Bank sent a letter addressed to Barr and The Stone Scone, which stated, “Dear Constance H Barr: Congratulations! Your company has been approved for a $100000 Small Business Credit Express Line of Credit.” The bank sent account statements addressed to both The Stone Scone and Barr. For four years, Fleet Bank provided funds to The Stone Scone. After that time, however, The Stone Scone did not make any further payments on

the loan, leaving $91,444 unpaid principal. Pursuant to the loan agreement, interest on the unpaid principal balance continued to accrue at a rate of 6.5 percent per year. Bank of America, N.A., who had acquired Fleet Bank, sued The Stone Scone and Barr to recover the unpaid principal and inter-est. Barr stipulated to a judgment against The Stone Scone, which she had converted to an limited liabil-ity company, but denied personal responsibility for the unpaid debt. The trial court found Barr person-ally liable for the debt. Barr appealed.

Issue

Is Barr, the sole owner of The Stone Scone, person-ally liable for the unpaid debt?

Language of the Court

The trial record contains sufficient evidence that Barr is personally liable for the debt owed to Bank of America. The evidence demonstrates that, at

(case continues)


568PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics




the time Barr acted on The Stone Scone’s behalf to procure the small business line of credit, she was the owner of The Stone Scone and the sole proprietor of that business. An individual doing business as a sole proprietor, even when busi-ness is done under a different name, remains personally liable for all of the obligations of the sole proprietorship. As the sole proprietor of The Stone Scone when that sole proprietorship en-tered into the agreement for a line of credit with Fleet Bank, Barr became personally liable for the debts incurred on that line of credit account.

Decision

The supreme judicial court affirmed the trial court’s judgment that held Barr personally liable,


as the sole proprietor of The Stone Scone, for the sole proprietorship’s unpaid debt owed to Bank of America.

Case Questions

Critical Legal Thinking

What is a sole proprietorship? What are the main attributes of sole proprietorship?

Ethics

Did Barr act ethically in denying responsibility for The Stone Scone’s debts?

Contemporary Business

Why are sole proprietors held personally liable for the debts of their businesses?























general partnership (ordinary partnership)

An association of two or more persons to carry on as co-owners of a business for profit [UPA Section 6(1)].

general partners (partners)

Persons liable for the debts and obligations of a general partnership.



Uniform Partnership Act (UPA)
A model act that codifies partner-ship law. Most states have adopted the UPA in whole or in part.




Taxation of a Sole Proprietorship

A sole proprietorship is not a separate legal entity, so it does not pay taxes at the business level. Instead, the earnings and losses from a sole proprietorship are reported on each sole proprietor’s personal income tax filing. A sole proprietor-ship business earns income and pays expenses during the course of operating the business. A sole proprietor has to file tax returns and pay taxes to state and federal governments. For federal income tax purposes, a sole proprietor must prepare a personal income tax Form 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return and report the income or loss from the sole proprietorship on his or her personal income tax form. The income or loss from the sole proprietorship is reported on Schedule C (Profit or Loss from Business), which must be attached to the taxpayer’s Form 1040.

General Partnership

General partnership, or ordinary partnership, has been recognized since ancient times. The English common law of partnerships governed early U.S. partnerships. The individual states expanded the body of partnership law.

A general partnership, commonly referred as a partnership, is a voluntary association of two or more persons for carrying on a business as co-owners for profit. The formation of a general partnership creates certain rights and duties among partners and with third parties. These rights and duties are established in the partnership agreement and by law. General partners, or partners, are person-ally liable for the debts and obligations of the partnership (see Exhibit 34.2).

Uniform Partnership Act (UPA)

In 1914, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, which is a group of lawyers, judges, and legal scholars, promulgated the Uniform Partnership Act (UPA). The UPA is a model act that codifies general partnership law. Its goal was to establish consistent partnership law that was uniform throughout the Unites States. The UPA has been adopted in whole or in part by most states, the District of Columbia, Guam, and the Virgin Islands. A Revised Uniform Partnership Act (RUPA) has been issued by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, but it has not been adopted by many states.


CHAPTER 34   Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships	569


	Debt or		
General	obligation owed		Third
Partnership			Party
			


Exhibit 34.2 GENERAL

PARTNERSHIP



Capital investment




General	General	General	General
Partner	Partner	Partner	Partner





Personal liability
for partnership’s
debts and obligations

The UPA covers most problems that arise in the formation, operation, and dis-solution of general partnerships. Other rules of law or equity govern if there is no applicable provision of the UPA [UPA Section 5]. The UPA forms the basis of the study of general partnerships in this chapter.

Formation of a General Partnership

A business must meet four criteria to qualify as a general partnership under the UPA [UPA Section 6(1)]. It must be (1) an association of two or more persons (2) carrying on a business (3) as co-owners (4) for profit. A general partnership is a voluntary asso-ciation of two or more persons. All partners must agree to the participation of each co-partner. A person cannot be forced to be a partner or to accept another person as a partner. The UPA’s definition of person who may be a general partner includes nat-ural persons, partnerships (including limited partnerships), corporations, and other associations. A business—a trade, an occupation, or a profession—must be carried on. The organization or venture must have a profit motive in order to qualify as a partnership, even though the business does not actually have to make a profit.

A general partnership may be formed with little or no formality. Co-ownership of a business is essential to create a partnership. The most important factor in determining co-ownership is whether the parties share the business’s profits and management responsibility.

Receipt of a share of business profits is prima facie evidence of a general part-nership because nonpartners usually are not given the right to share in a business’s profits. No inference of the existence of a general partnership is drawn if profits are received in payment of (1) a debt owed to a creditor in installments or otherwise;

(2)wages owed to an employee; (3) rent owed to a landlord; (4) an annuity owed to a widow, widower, or representative of a deceased partner; (5) interest owed on a loan; or (6) consideration for the sale of goodwill of a business [UPA Section 7]. An agreement to share losses of a business is strong evidence of a general partnership.

The right to participate in the management of a business is important evidence for determining the existence of a general partnership, but it is not conclusive evidence because the right to participate in management is sometimes given to employees, creditors, and others. It is compelling evidence of the existence of a general partnership if a person is given the right to share in profits, losses, and management of a business.


570PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics

Name of the General Partnership

A general partnership can operate under the names of any one or more of the partners or under a fictitious business name. A general partnership must file a fictitious business name statement—d.b.a. (doing business as)—with the appro-priate government agency to operate under a trade name. The general partner-ship usually must publish a notice of the use of the trade name in a newspaper of general circulation where the partnership does business. The name selected by the partnership cannot indicate that it is a corporation (e.g., it cannot contain the term Inc.) and cannot be similar to the name used by any existing business entity.















general partnership agreement (articles of general partnership or articles of partnership)
A written agreement that partners sign to form a general partnership.

General Partnership Agreement

The agreement to form a general partnership may be oral, written, or implied from the conduct of the parties. It may even be created inadvertently. No for-malities are necessary, although a few states require general partnerships to file certificates of partnership with an appropriate government agency. General part-nerships that exist for more than one year or are authorized to deal in real estate must be in writing under the Statute of Frauds.

It is good practice for partners to put their partnership agreement in writing. A written document is important evidence of the terms of the agreement, particu-larly if a dispute arises among the partners.

A written agreement is called a general partnership agreement, or articles of general partnership, or articles of partnership. The parties can agree to almost any terms in their partnership agreement, except terms that are illegal. The arti-cles of partnership can be short and simple or long and complex. If an agreement fails to provide for an essential term or contingency, the provisions of the UPA apply. Thus, the UPA acts as a gap-filling device to the partners’ agreement.

Taxation of General Partnerships

General partnerships do not pay federal income taxes. Instead, the income and losses of partnership flow onto and have to be reported on the individual partners’ personal income tax returns. This is called flow-through taxation. A general partnership has to file an information return with the government, telling the government how much income was earned or the amount of losses incurred by the partnership. This way, the government tax authorities can trace whether partners are correctly reporting their income or losses.


Rights of General Partners

The partners of a general partnership have certain rights. The rights of general partners are discussed in the following paragraphs.





right to participate in management

A situation in which, unless other-wise agreed, each partner has a right to participate in the manage-ment of a partnership and has an equal vote on partnership matters.

Right to Participate in Management

In the absence of an agreement to the contrary, all general partners have an equal right to participate in the management of the general partnership business. In other words, each partner has one vote, regardless of the proportional size of his or her capital contribution or share in the partnership’s profits. Under the UPA, a simple majority decides most ordinary partnership matters [UPA Section 18]. If the vote is tied, the action being voted on is considered to be defeated.

Example Maude, George, Hillary, and Michael form a general partnership. $200,000 capital is contributed to the partnership in the following amounts: Maude $60,000 (30 percent), George $10,000 (5 percent), Hillary $100,000 (50 percent) and Michael $30,000 (15 percent). Here, although the capital contributions of the partners differ


CHAPTER 34   Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships	571

significantly each of the four partners has an equal say in the business. The partners can, by agreement, modify the UPA’s majority rule by delegating management respon-sibility to a committee of partners or to a managing partner.

Right to Share in Profits

Unless otherwise agreed, the UPA mandates that a general partner has the right to an equal share in the partnership’s profits and losses [UPA Section 18(a)]. The right to share in the profits of the partnership is considered to be the right to share in the earnings from the investment of capital.

Example Maude, George, Hillary, and Michael form a general partnership. Capital is contributed to the partnership in the following amounts: Maude 30 percent, George 5 percent, Hillary 50 percent, and Michael 15 percent. The partnership makes $100,000 profit for the year. Here, although the capital contributions of the partners differ significantly each of the four partners will share equally in the profits of the business—each will receive $25,000.

Where a partnership agreement provides for the sharing of profits but is silent as to how losses are to be shared, losses are shared in the same proportion as profits. The reverse is not true, however. If a partnership agreement provides for the sharing of losses but is silent as to how profits are to be shared, profits are shared equally.

Partnership agreements can provide that profits and losses are to be allocated in proportion to the partners’ capital contributions or in any other manner.

Example Partners with high incomes from other sources can benefit the most by hav-ing the losses generated by a partnership allocated in a greater portion to them.

Right to Compensation

Unless otherwise agreed, the UPA provides that no general partner is entitled to remuneration for his or her performance in the partnership’s business [UPA Section 18(f)]. Under this rule, partners are not entitled to receive a salary for providing services to the partnership unless agreed to by the partners.

Under the UPA, it is implied that general partners will devote full time and service to the partnership. Thus, unless otherwise agreed, income earned by partners from providing services elsewhere belongs to the partnership [UPA Section 21].


Right to Indemnification

Partners sometimes incur personal travel, business, and other expenses on behalf of the partnership. A general partner is entitled to indemnification (i.e., reim-bursement) for such expenditures if they are reasonably incurred in the ordinary and proper conduct of the business [UPA Section 18(b)].

Right to Return of Loans

A partner who makes a loan to the partnership becomes a creditor of the partner-ship. The partner is entitled to repayment of the loan, but this right is subordi-nated to the claims of creditors who are not partners [UPA Section 40(b)]. The partner is also entitled to receive interest from the date of the loan.

Right to Return of Capital

Upon termination of a general partnership, the partners are entitled to have their capital contributions returned to them [UPA Section 18(a)]. However, this right is subordinated to the rights of creditors, who must be paid their claims first [UPA Section 40(b)].




indemnification

The right of a partner to be reim-bursed for expenditures incurred on behalf of the partnership.


572PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics




The merchant has no country.

Thomas Jefferson

Right to Information

Each general partner has the right to demand true and full information from any other partner of all things affecting the partnership [UPA Section 20]. The corollary to this rule is that each partner has a duty to provide such information upon the receipt of a reasonable demand. The partnership books (e.g., financial records, tax records) must be kept at the partnership’s principal place of business [UPA Section 19]. The partners have an absolute right to inspect and copy these records.











duty of loyalty

A duty that a partner owes not to act adversely to the interests of the partnership.

Duties of General Partners

General partners owe certain duties to each other and the partnership. The duties of partners are discussed in the following paragraphs.

Duty of Loyalty

General partners are in a fiduciary relationship with one another. As such, they owe each other a duty of loyalty. This duty is imposed by law and cannot be waived. If there is a conflict between partnership interests and personal interests, the partner must choose the interest of the partnership. Some basic forms of breach of loyalty involve:

•Self-dealing. Self-dealing occurs when a partner deals personally with the general partnership, such as buying or selling goods or property to the part-nership. Such actions are permitted only if full disclosure is made and con-sent of the other partners is obtained.

Example Dan is a partner in a general partnership that is looking for a piece of real property on which to build a new store. Dan owns a desirable piece of property. To sell the property to the partnership, Dan must first disclose his ownership interest and receive his partners’ consent.

•Usurping a partnership opportunity. A general partner who is offered an opportunity on behalf of the partnership cannot usurp the partnership opportunity for himself or herself. If a third party offers a business oppor-tunity to a general partner in his partnership status, the partner cannot take the opportunity for himself before offering it to the partnership. If the partnership rejects the opportunity, the partner is free to pursue the opportunity.

Example Ike, Ida, and Iodine are general partners who own the general part-nership Real Estate Development Associates, which develops and builds commercial real estate projects such as office buildings, warehouses, and such. One day, a person who owns a piece of vacant real estate goes to Ike and offers to sell the real estate to the general partnership. Ike sees that that it is an excellent price, so he purchases the real estate for himself and does not bring the opportunity to the partnership. He has usurped a partnership opportunity.

•Competing with the partnership. A general partner may not compete with the partnership without the permission of the other partners.

Example A partner of a general partnership that operates an automobile deal-ership cannot open a competing automobile dealership without his or her co-partners’ permission.

•Making secret profits. General partners may not make secret profits from partnership business.

Example A partner who takes a kickback from a supplier has made a secret profit.

The secret profit belongs to the partnership.


CHAPTER 34   Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships	573

•Breach of confidentiality. General partners owe a duty to keep partnership information confidential. Failure to do so is a breach of confidentiality.

Example Trade secrets, customer lists, and other secret information are confi-dential. A partner who misuses this information—either himself or by trans-ferring the information to someone else—has breached confidentiality.

•Misuse of partnership property. General partners owe a duty not to use partnership property for personal use. If a general partner uses part-nership property for personal use is constitutes a misuse of partnership property.

A general partner who breaches the duty of loyalty must disgorge any profits made from the breach to the partnership. In addition, the partner is liable for any damages caused by the breach.


Duty of Care

A general partner must use reasonable care and skill in transacting partnership business. The duty of care calls for the partners to use the same level of care and skill that a reasonable business manager in the same position would use in the same circumstances. Breach of the duty of care is negligence. A general partner is liable to the partnership for any damages caused by his or her negligence. The partners are not liable for honest errors in judgment.

Examples Tina, Eric, and Brian form a general partnership to sell automobiles. Tina, who is responsible for ordering inventory, orders large, expensive sport-utility vehicles (SUVs) that use large amounts of gasoline. A war breaks out in the Middle East that interrupts the supply of oil to the United States. The demand for large SUVs drops substantially, and the partnership cannot sell its inventory. Tina is not liable because the duty of care was not breached.




duty of care

The obligation partners owe to use the same level of care and skill that a reasonable person in the same position would use in the same circumstances. A breach of the duty of care is negligence.


Duty to Inform

General partners owe a duty to inform their co-partners of all information they possess that is relevant to the affairs of the partnership [UPA Section 20]. Even if a partner fails to do so, the other partners are imputed with knowledge of all notices concerning any matters relating to partnership affairs. This is called imputed knowledge. Knowledge is also imputed regarding information acquired in the role of partner that affects the partnership and should have been commu-nicated to the other partners [UPA Section 12].

Example Ted and Diane are partners. Ted knows that a piece of property owned by their general partnership contains dangerous toxic wastes but fails to inform Diane of this fact. Even though Diane does not have actual knowledge of this fact, it is imputed to her.

Duty of Obedience

The duty of obedience requires general partners to adhere to the provisions of the partnership agreement and the decisions of the partnership. A partner who breaches this duty is liable to the partnership for any damages caused by the breach.

Example Jodie, Bart, and Denise form a general partnership to develop real prop-erty. Their partnership agreement specifies that acts of the partners are limited to those necessary to accomplish the partnership’s purpose. Suppose Bart, acting alone, loses $100,000 of partnership funds in commodities trading. Bart is person-ally liable to the partnership for the lost funds because he breached the partner-ship agreement.



duty to inform

A duty a partner owes to inform his or her co-partners of all information he or she possesses that is relevant to the affairs of the partnership.











duty of obedience

A duty that requires partners to adhere to the provisions of the partnership agreement and the decisions of the partnership.


574PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics





action for an accounting

A formal judicial proceeding in which the court is authorized to

(1)review the partnership and the partners’ transactions and

(2)award each partner his or her share of the partnership assets.

Right to an Accounting

General partners are not permitted to sue the partnership or other partners at law. Instead, they are given the right to bring an action for an accounting against other partners. An action for an accounting is a formal judicial proceeding in which the court is authorized to (1) review the partnership and the partners’ transactions and (2) award each partner his or her share of the partnership assets [UPA Section 24]. An action results in a money judgment for or against partners, according to the balance struck.


Example If a partner suspects that another partner is committing fraud by stealing partnership assets, the partner can bring an action for an accounting.























unlimited personal liability of a general partner
A general partner’s personal liability for the debts and obligations of the general partnership.

joint and several liability

Tort liability of partners together and individually. A plaintiff can sue one or more partners separately. If suc-cessful, the plaintiff can recover the entire amount of the judgment from any or all of the defendant-partners who have been found liable.

Liability of General Partners

General partners must deal with third parties in conducting partnership busi-ness. This often includes entering into contracts with third parties on behalf of the partnership. Partners, employees, and agents of the partnership sometimes injure third parties while conducting partnership business. Partners of a general partnership have personal liability for the contracts and torts of the partnership. Contract and tort liability of general partnerships and their partners is discussed in the following paragraphs.

Tort Liability of General Partners

While acting on partnership business, a partner or an employee of the general partnership may commit a tort that causes injury to a third person. This tort could be caused by a negligent act, a breach of trust (e.g., embezzlement from a customer’s account), breach of fiduciary duty, defamation, fraud, or another intentional tort. The general partnership is liable if the act is committed while the person is acting within the ordinary course of partnership business or with the authority of his or her co-partners. General partners have unlimited personal liability for the debts and obligations of the partnership.

Under the UPA, general partners have joint and several liability for torts and breaches of trust [UPA Section 15(a)]. This is so even if a partner did not par-ticipate in the commission of the act. This type of liability permits a third party to sue one or more of the general partners separately. Judgment can be collected only against the partners who are sued.

Example Nicole, Jim, and Maureen form a general partnership. Jim, while on part-nership business, causes an automobile accident that injures Catherine, a pedes-trian. Catherine suffers $100,000 in injuries. Catherine, at her option, can sue Nicole, Jim, or Maureen separately, or any two of them, or all of them.

The partnership and partners who are made to pay tort liability may seek indemnification from the partner who committed the wrongful act. A release of one partner does not discharge the liability of other partners.








joint liability

Liability of partners for contracts and debts of the partnership. A plaintiff must name the partnership and all of the partners as defen-dants in a lawsuit.

Contract Liability of General Partners

As a legal entity, a general partnership must act through its agents—that is, its partners and employees. Contracts entered into with suppliers, customers, lend-ers, or others on the partnership’s behalf are binding on the partnership. General partners have unlimited personal liability for contracts of the partnership.

Under the UPA, general partners have joint liability for the contracts and debts of the partnership [UPA Section 15(b)]. This means that a third party who sues to recover on a partnership contract or debt must name all the general partners in the lawsuit. If such a lawsuit is successful, the plaintiff can collect the entire amount of the judgment against any or all of the partners. If the third party’s suit


CHAPTER 34   Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships	575

does not name all the general partners, the judgment cannot be collected against any of the partners or the partnership assets. Similarly, releasing any general partner from the lawsuit releases them all. Some states provide that general part-ners are jointly and severally liable for the contracts of the general partnership.

A general partner who is made to pay more than his or her proportionate share of contract liability may seek indemnification from the partnership and from those partners who have not paid their share of the loss.

Liability of Incoming Partners

A new partner who is admitted to a general partnership is liable for the existing debts and obligations (antecedent debts) of the partnership only to the extent of his or her capital contribution. The incoming partner is personally liable for debts and obligations incurred by the general partnership after becoming a partner.

Example Bubble.com is a general partnership with four partners. On May 1, Freder-ick is admitted as a new general partner by investing a $100,000 capital contribu-tion. As of May 1, Bubble.com owes $800,000 of preexisting debt. After Frederick becomes a partner, the general partnership borrows $1 million of new debt. If the general partnership goes bankrupt and out of business still owing both debts, Frederick’s capital contribution of $100,000 will go toward paying the $800,000 of existing debt owed by the partnership when he joined the partnership, but he is not personally liable for this debt. However, Frederick is personally liable for the $1 million of unpaid debt that the partnership borrowed after he became a partner.

Liability of Outgoing Partners

The dissolution of a general partnership does not of itself discharge the liability of an outgoing partner for existing partnership debts and obligations. If a general partnership is dissolved, each general partner is personally liable for debts and obligations of the partnership that exist at the time of dissolution.

If a general partnership is dissolved because a general partner leaves the partner-ship and the partnership is continued by the remaining partners, the outgoing part-ner is personally liable for the debts and obligations of the partnership at the time of dissolution. The outgoing partner is not liable for any new debts and obligations incurred by the general partnership after the dissolution, as long as proper notifica-tion of his or her withdrawal from the partnership has been given to the creditor.


Dissolution of a General Partnership

The duration of a partnership can be a fixed term (e.g., five years) or until a particular undertaking is accomplished (e.g., until a real estate development is completed), or it can be an unspecified term. A partnership with a fixed duration is called a partnership for a term. A partnership with no fixed duration is called a partnership at will.

The dissolution of a partnership is “the change in the relation of the partners caused by any partner ceasing to be associated in the carrying on of the business” [UPA Section 29]. A partnership that is formed for a specific time (e.g., five years) or purpose (e.g., the completion of a real estate development) dissolves automati-cally upon the expiration of the time or the accomplishment of the objective. Any partner of a partnership at will (i.e., one without a stated time or purpose) may rightfully withdraw and dissolve the partnership at any time.

Winding Up of the Partnership

Unless a partnership is continued, the winding up of the partnership follows its dissolution. The process of winding up consists of the liquidation (sale) of part-nership assets and the distribution of the proceeds to satisfy claims against the




partnership for a term

A partnership created for a fixed duration.

partnership at will

A partnership created with no fixed duration.

dissolution

The change in the relationship of partners in a partnership caused by any partner ceasing to be associated in the carrying on of the business [UPA Section 29].

winding up

The process of liquidating a partner-ship’s assets and distributing the proceeds to satisfy claims against the partnership.


576PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics

partnership. The surviving partners have the right to wind up the partnership. If a surviving partner performs the winding up, he or she is entitled to reasonable compensation for his or her services [UPA Section 18(f)].










wrongful dissolution

A situation in which a partner with-draws from a partnership without having the right to do so at that time.

Wrongful Dissolution

A partner has the power to withdraw and dissolve the partnership at any time, whether it is a partnership at will or a partnership for a term. A partner who with-draws from a partnership at will has the right to do so and is therefore not liable for dissolving the partnership. A partner who withdraws from a partnership for a term prior to the expiration of the term does not have the right to dissolve the partner-ship. The partner’s action causes a wrongful dissolution of the partnership. The partner is liable for damages caused by the wrongful dissolution of the partnership.

Example Ashley, Vivi, Qixia, and Tina form a general partnership called “DownScale Partnership” to operate an upscale men’s clothing store. The partnership has a stated term of five years. After one year, Ashley decides to quit the partnership. Because Ashley has the power to quit the partnership, when she does so, the four-partner partnership dissolves. Ashley does not have the right to quit the partnership, and her action causes the wrongful dissolution of the partnership. She is liable for any damages caused by her wrongful dissolution of the partnership.




Fraud is infinite in variety: sometimes it is audacious and unblushing: sometimes it pays a sort of homage to virtue, and then it is mod-est and retiring: it would be honesty itself, if it could only afford it.

Lord MacNaghten

Reddaway v. Banham (1896)

Notice of Dissolution

The dissolution of a partnership terminates the partners’ actual authority to enter into contracts or otherwise act on behalf of the partnership. Notice of dissolution must be given to certain third parties. The degree of notice depends on the rela-tionship of the third party with the partnership [UPA Section 35]:

1.Third parties who have actually dealt with the partnership must be given actual notice (verbal or written) of dissolution or have acquired knowledge of the dissolution from another source.

2.Third parties who have not dealt with the partnership but have knowledge of it must be given either actual or constructive notice of dissolution. Constructive notice consists of publishing a notice of dissolution in a newspaper of general circulation serving the area where the business of the partnership was regu-larly conducted.

3.Third parties who have not dealt with the partnership and do not have knowl-edge of it do not have to be given notice.

If proper notice is not given to a required third party after the dissolution of a partnership, and a partner enters into a contract with the third party, liability may be imposed on the previous partners on the grounds of apparent authority.

Distribution of Assets

After partnership assets have been liquidated and reduced to cash, the proceeds are distributed to satisfy claims against the partnership. The debts are satisfied in the following order [UPA Section 40(b)]:

1.Creditors (except partners who are creditors)

2.Creditor-partners

3.Capital contributions

4.Profits

The partners can agree to change the priority of distributions among them-selves. If the partnership cannot satisfy its creditors’ claims, the partners are personally liable for the partnership’s debts and obligations [UPA Sections 40(d), 40(f)]. After the proceeds are distributed, the partnership automatically termi-nates. Termination ends the legal existence of the partnership [UPA Section 30].


CHAPTER 34   Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships	577


Continuation of a General Partnership After Dissolution

The surviving, or remaining, partners have the right to continue a partnership after its dissolution. It is good practice for the partners of a partnership to enter into a continuation agreement that expressly sets forth the events that allow for continuation of the partnership, the amount to be paid outgoing partners, and other details.

When a partnership is continued, the old partnership is dissolved, and a new partnership is created. The new partnership is composed of the remaining part-ners and any new partners admitted to the partnership. The creditors of the old partnership become creditors of the new partnership and have equal status with the creditors of the new partnership [UPA Section 41].

The following feature discusses an important partnership issue.


No nation was ever ruined by trade.

Benjamin Franklin

right of survivorship

A rule which provides that upon the death of a general partner, the deceased partner’s right in specific partnership property vests in the remaining partner or partners; the value of the deceased general partner’s interest in the partnership passes to his or her beneficiaries or heirs.


Contemporary Environment

Right of Survivorship of General Partners


A general partner is a co-owner with the other partners of the specific partnership property as a tenant in partnership [UPA Section 25(1)]. This is a special legal status that exists in a general partnership. Upon the death of a gen-eral partner, the deceased partner’s right in specific part-nership property vests in the remaining partner or partners; it does not pass to his or her heirs or next of kin. This is called the right of survivorship. The value of the deceased general partner’s interest in the partnership passes to his or her beneficiaries or heirs upon his or her death, however. Upon the death of the last surviving partner, the rights in specific partnership property vest in the deceased partner’s legal representative [UPA Section 25(2)(C)].


Example Jennifer, Harold, Shou-Ju, and Jesus form a general partnership to operate a new restaurant. After their first restaurant is successful, they expand until the partnership owns one hundred restaurants. At that time, Jennifer dies. None of the partnership assets transfer to Jennifer’s heirs. For example, her heirs do not get twenty-five of the restaurants. Instead, under the right of survivorship, they inherit Jennifer’s ownership interest, and her heirs now have the right to receive Jennifer’s one-quarter of the partnership’s profits each year.




SMALL BUSINESS


This is the main street of St. Ignace, Michigan. Small businesses serve local communities across the United States.


578PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics

Key Terms and Concepts

Action for an accounting	Fiduciary relationship	Joint liability (574)	Secret profits
(574)	(572)	Misuse of partnership	(572)
Actual notice (576)	Flow-through taxation	property (573)	Self-dealing (572)
Antecedent debt (575)	(570)	Negligence (573)	Sole proprietor
Apparent authority (576)	Form 1040 U.S. Individual	Notice of dissolution	(565)
Breach of confidentiality	Income Tax Return	(576)	Sole proprietorship
(573)	(568)	Outgoing partner (575)	(565)
Competing with the	General partner	Partnership at will	Tenant in partnership
partnership (572)	(partner) (568)	(575)	(577)
Constructive notice (576)	General partnership	Partnership for a term	Tort liability (574)
Continuation agreement	(ordinary partnership)	(575)	Trade name (566)
(577)	(568)	Personal liability (574)	Uniform Partnership Act
Contract liability (575)	General partnership	Revised Uniform	(UPA) (568)
d.b.a. (doing business as)	agreement (articles of	Partnership Act	Unlimited personal
(566)	general partnership or	(RUPA) (568)	liability of a general
Dissolution (575)	articles of partnership)	Right of survivorship	partner (574)
Duty of care (573)	(570)	(577)	Unlimited personal
Duty of loyalty (572)	Imputed knowledge	Right to participate in	liability of a sole
Duty of obedience (573)	(573)	management (570)	proprietor (566)
Duty to inform (573)	Incoming partner	Right to share in profits	Usurping a partnership
Entrepreneur (565)	(575)	(571)	opportunity (572)
Fictitious business name	Indemnification (571)	Schedule C (Profit or	Winding up (575)
statement (certificate	Joint and several liability	Loss from Business)	Wrongful dissolution
of trade name) (566)	(574)	(568)	(576)


Critical Legal Thinking Cases

34.1 Sole Proprietorship James Schuster was a sole proprietor doing business as (d.b.a.) “Diversity Heat-ing and Plumbing” (Diversity Heating). Diversity Heating was in the business of selling, installing, and servic-ing heating and plumbing systems. George Vernon and others (Vernon) owned a building that needed a new boiler. Vernon hired Diversity Heating to install a new boiler in the building. Diversity Heating installed the boiler and gave a warranty that the boiler would not crack for ten years. Four years later, James Schuster died. On that date, James’s son, Jerry Schuster, inherit-ed his father’s business and thereafter ran the business as a sole proprietorship under the d.b.a. “Diversity Heating and Plumbing.” One year later, the boiler installed in Vernon’s building broke and could not be repaired. Ver-non demanded that Jerry Schuster honor the warranty and replace the boiler. When Jerry Schuster refused to do so, Vernon had the boiler replaced at a cost of $8,203 and sued Jerry Schuster to recover this amount for breach of warranty. Jerry Schuster argued that he was a sole proprietor and as such he was not liable for the business obligations his father had incurred while operating his own sole proprietorship. Is Jerry Schuster liable for the warranty made by his father? Vernon v. Schuster, d/b/a/ Diversity Heating and Plumbing, 688 N.E.2d 1172, Web 1997 Ill. Lexis 482 (Supreme Court of Illinois)



34.2 Liability of General Partners Jose Pena and Joseph Antenucci were medical doctors who were partners in a medical practice. Both doctors treated Elaine Zuckerman during her pregnancy. Her son, Daniel Zuckerman, was born with severe physical prob-lems. Elaine, as Daniel’s mother and natural guardian, brought a medical malpractice suit against both doc-tors. The jury found that Pena was guilty of medical malpractice but that Antenucci was not. The amount of the verdict totaled $4 million. The trial court entered judgment against Pena but not against Antenucci. Plain-tiff Zuckerman made a posttrial motion for judgment against both defendants. Is Antenucci jointly and sever-ally liable for the medical malpractice of his partner, Pena? Zuckerman v. Antenucci, 478 N.Y.S.2d 578, Web 1984 N.Y.Misc. Lexis 3283 (Supreme Court of New York)

34.3 General Partnership Thomas Smithson, a house builder and small-scale property developer, decided that a certain tract of undeveloped land in Franklin, Tennes-see, would be extremely attractive for development into a real estate subdivision. Smithson contacted the owner of the property, Monsanto Chemical Company, and was told that the company would sell the property at the “right price.”

Smithson did not have the funds with which to em-bark unassisted in the endeavor, so he contacted Frank


CHAPTER 34   Small Business, Entrepreneurship, and General Partnerships	579


White, a co-owner of the Andrews Realty Company, and two agents of the firm, Dennis Devrow and Tem-ple Ennis. Smithson showed them a sketch map with the proposed layout of the lots, roads, and so forth. Smithson testified that they all orally agreed to develop the property together, and in lieu of a financial invest-ment, Smithson would oversee the engineering of the property. Subsequently, H. R. Morgan was brought into the deal to provide additional financing.

Smithson later discovered that White had contacted Monsanto directly. When challenged about this, White assured Smithson that he was still “part of the deal” but refused to put the agreement in writing. White, Dev-row, Ennis, and Morgan purchased the property from Monsanto. They then sold it to H.A.H. Associates, a corporation, for an $184,000 profit. When they refused to pay Smithson, he sued to recover an equal share of the profits. Was a partnership formed between Smith-son and the defendants? Who wins? Smithson v. White, Web 1988 Tenn.App. Lexis 221 (Court of Appeals of Tennessee)

34.4 Right to an Accounting Charles Fial and Roger J. Steeby entered into a partnership called Audit Con-sultants to perform auditing services. Pursuant to the agreement, they shared equally the equity, income, and profits of the partnership. Originally, they performed the auditing services themselves, but as business in-creased, they engaged independent contractors to do some of the audit work. Fial’s activities generated ap-proximately 80 percent of the partnership’s revenues. Unhappy with their agreement to divide the profits equally, Fial wrote a letter to Steeby seven years later, dissolving the partnership.

Fial asserted that the clients should be assigned based on who brought them into the business. Fial formed a new business called Audit Consultants of Colorado, Inc. He then terminated the original partnership’s contracts with many clients and put them under contract with his new firm. Fial also terminated the partnership’s contracts with the independent-contractor auditors and signed many of these auditors with his new firm. The partnership terminated about eleven months after Fial wrote the letter to Steeby. Steeby brought an ac-tion against Fial, alleging breach of fiduciary duty and seeking a final accounting. Who wins? Steeby v. Fial, 765 P.2d 1081, Web 1988 Colo.App. Lexis 409 (Court of Appeals of Colorado)

34.5 Fiduciary Duty Edgar and Selwyn Husted, at-torneys, formed Husted and Husted, a law partnership. Herman McCloud, who was the executor of his mother’s estate, hired them as attorneys for the estate. When taxes were due on the estate, Edgar told McCloud to make a check for $18,000 payable to the Husted and Husted Trust Account and that he would pay the IRS from this account. There was no Husted and Husted

Trust Account. Instead, Edgar deposited the check into his own personal account and converted the funds to his own personal use. When Edgar’s misconduct was uncovered, McCloud sued the law firm for conversion of estate funds. Is the partnership liable for Edgar’s ac-tions? Husted v. McCloud, 436 N.E.2d 341, Web 1982 Ind.App. Lexis 1244 (Court of Appeals of Indiana)

34.6 Tort Liability Thomas McGrath was a partner in the law firm Tarbenson, Thatcher, McGrath, Treadwell & Schoonmaker. One day, at approximately 4:30 P.M., McGrath went to a restaurant–cocktail establishment in Kirkland, Washington. From that time until about 11:00 P.M., he imbibed considerable alcohol while socializing and discussing personal and firm-related business. Af-ter 11:00 P.M., McGrath did not discuss firm business but continued to socialize and drink until approxi-mately 1:45 A.M., when he and Fredrick Hayes, another bar patron, exchanged words. Shortly thereafter, the two encountered each other outside, and after another exchange, McGrath shot Hayes. Hayes sued McGrath and the law firm for damages. Who is liable? Hayes v. Tarbenson, Thatcher, McGrath, Treadwell & Schoon-maker, 50 Wash.App. 505, 749 P.2d 178, Web 1988 Wash.App. Lexis 27 (Court of Appeals of Washington)

34.7 Notice of Dissolution Leonard Sumter, Sr., en-tered into a general partnership agreement with his son, Michael T. Sumter, to conduct a plumbing busi-ness in Shreveport, Louisiana, under the name Sum-ter Plumbing Company. The father, on behalf of the general partnership, executed a credit application with Thermal Supply of Louisiana, Inc., for an open ac-count to purchase supplies on credit. For the next four years, the Sumters purchased plumbing supplies from Thermal on credit and paid their bills without fail. Both partners and one employee signed for supplies at Thermal. Subsequently, the partnership was dissolved, and all outstanding debts to Thermal were paid in full. The Sumters did not, however, notify Thermal that the partnership had been dissolved.

A year later, the son decided to reenter the plumb-ing business. He used the name previously used by the former partnership, listed the same post office ad-dress for billing purposes, and hired the employee of the former partnership who signed for supplies at Ther-mal. The father decided not to become involved in this venture. The son began purchasing supplies on credit from Thermal on the open credit account of the former partnership. Thermal was not informed that the son was opening a new business. When the son defaulted on payments to Thermal, it sued the original partner-ship to recover the debt. Is the father liable for his son’s debts? Thermal Supply of Louisiana, Inc. v. Sumter, 452 So.2d 312, Web 1984 La.App. Lexis 8975 (Court of Appeal of Louisiana)


580PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics

Ethics Cases


34.8 Ethics Harriet Hankin, Samuel Hankin, Moe Henry Hankin, Perch P.

Hankin, and Pauline Hankin and their spouses for many years operated a family partnership composed of vast real estate holdings. Some of the properties included restaurants, industrial buildings, shopping centers, golf courses, a motel chain, and hundreds of acres of de-velopable ground, estimated to be worth $72 million. Because of family disagreement and discontent, the Hankin family agreed to dissolve the partnership. When they could not agree on how to liquidate the partner-ship assets, Harriet and Samuel (collectively called Har-riet) initiated an equity action.

Based on assurances from Moe and Perch that they would sell the partnership assets as quickly as possible and at the highest possible price, the court appointed them as liquidators of the partnership during the winding-up period. Based on similar assurances, the court again appointed them liquidators for the part-nership. But two years later, only enough property had been sold to retire the debt of the partnership. Evidence showed that Moe and Perch had not aggressively mar-keted the remaining properties and that Moe wished to purchase some of the properties for himself at a sub-stantial discount from their estimated value. Six years and three appeals to the superior court later, Harriet brought an action seeking the appointment of a receiver to liquidate the remaining partnership assets.

Have the winding-up partners breached their fiduciary duties? Should the court appoint a receiver to liquidate

the remaining partnership assets? Has Moe Henry Han-kin acted ethically in this case? Hankin v. Hankin, 507 Pa. 603, 493 A.2d 675, Web 1985 Pa. Lexis 337 (Supreme Court of Pennsylvania)

34.9 Ethics John Gilroy, an established commercial photographer in Kalamazoo, Michigan, had a small contractual clientele of schools for which he provided student portrait photographs. Robert Conway joined Gilroy’s established business, and they formed a part-nership called “Skylight Studios.” Both partners solic-ited schools with success, and gross sales, which were $40,000, increased every year and amounted to over $200,000 six years later.

Conway notified Gilroy that the partnership was dissolved. Gilroy discovered that Conway had closed up the partnership’s place of business and opened up his own business, had purchased equipment and sup-plies in preparation for opening his own business and charged them to the partnership, had taken with him the partnership’s employees and most of its equip-ment, had personally taken over business of some customers by telling them the partnership was being dissolved, and had withdrawn partnership funds for personal use. Gilroy sued Conway for an accounting, alleging that Conway had converted partnership assets. Did Conway act ethically in this case? Who wins? Gilroy v. Conway, 151 Mich.App. 628, 391 N.W.2d 419, Web 1986 Mich.App. Lexis 2633 (Court of Appeals of Michigan)


35CHAPTER

Limited Partnerships and Special Partnerships





















LIMITED PARTNERSHIP

Many businesses operate as a limited partnership. Limited partnerships have both general partners and limited partners, whose rights, duties, and liability differ.






Learning Objectives


After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

1.Define limited partnership.

2.Describe the process of forming a limited partnership.

3.Identify and describe the liability of general and limited partners.

4.Describe the process of dissolution and winding up of a limited partnership.

5.Define a limited liability limited partnership.
































Chapter Outline



Introduction to Limited Partnerships and Special Partnerships

Limited Partnership

CONTEMPORARY ENVIRONMENT Master Limited

Partnership

Liability of General and Limited Partners Management of a Limited Partnership
CONTEMPORARY ENVIRONMENT Modern Rule Permits

Limited Partners to Participate in Management


Dissolution of a Limited Partnership

Limited Liability Limited Partnership


582PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics

“There are a great many of us who will adhere to that ancient principle that we prefer to be governed by the power

of laws, and not by the power of men.”

—Woodrow Wilson

Speech, September 25, 1912






The partner of my partner is not my partner.

Legal maxim






limited partnership (special partnership)

A type of partnership that has two types of partners: general partners and limited partners.

general partners

Partners in a limited partnership who invest capital, manage the business, and are personally liable for partnership debts.

limited partners

Partners in a limited partnership who invest capital but do not participate in management and are not personally liable for partnership debts beyond their capital contributions.


Exhibit 35.1 LIMITED PARTNERSHIP

Introduction to Limited Partnerships and Special Partnerships

Limited partnerships are statutory creations that have been used since the Middle Ages. They include both general (manager) and limited (investor) partners. Today, all states have enacted statutes that provide for the creation of limited partnerships. In most states, these partnerships are called limited partnerships. Limited partner-ships are used for such business ventures as investing in real estate, drilling oil and gas wells, investing in movie productions, and the like. In most states, the formation, operation, and termination of limited partnerships are regulated by the Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act (RULPA).

There are several special forms of limited partnerships. Some limited partner-ships qualify as master limited partnerships that are traded publicly. In addition, some states permit the formation of a special form of partnership called a limited liability limited partnership that limits the liability of general partners.

This chapter discusses the formation, operation, and dissolution of limited part-nerships, master limited partnerships, and limited liability limited partnerships.

Limited Partnership

Today, all states have enacted statutes that provide for the creation of limited partner-ships. In most states, these partnerships are called limited partnerships, or special partnerships. Limited partnerships are used for such business ventures as investing in real estate, drilling oil and gas wells, investing in movie productions, and the like.

A limited partnership, or special partnership, has two types of partners: (1) general partners, who invest capital, manage the business, and are personally liable for partnership debts, and (2) limited partners, who invest capital but do not participate in management and are not personally liable for partnership debts beyond their capital contributions (see Exhibit 35.1).



	Debt or	
Limited	obligation owed	Third
			
Partnership			Party
			



Capital investment




Limited	Limited	General	General
Partner	Partner	Partner	Partner
Liability limited		
to capital			
contribution		
No personal liability	Personal liability
for partnership’s	for partnership’s
debts and obligations	debts and obligations


CHAPTER 35   Limited Partnerships and Special Partnerships	583

A limited partnership must have one or more general partners and one or more limited partners [RULPA Section 101(7)]. There are no upper limits on the number of general or limited partners allowed in a limited partnership. Any person—including natural persons, partnerships, limited partnerships, trusts, estates, associations, and corporations—may be a general or limited partner. A person may be both a general partner and a limited partner in the same limited partnership.


Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act

In 1916, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, a group of lawyers, judges, and legal scholars, promulgated the Uniform Limited Partnership Act (ULPA). The ULPA contains a uniform set of provisions for the formation, operation, and dissolution of limited partnerships. Most states origi-nally enacted this law.

In 1976, the National Conerence of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws promulgated the Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act (RULPA), which pro-vides a more modern, comprehensive law for the formation, operation, and dis-solution of limited partnerships. This law supersedes the ULPA in the states that have adopted it. The RULPA provides the basic foundation for the discussion of limited partnership law in the following text. In 2001, certain amendments were made to the RULPA. The changes made by these amendments are noted in this chapter.










Revised Uniform Limited Partnership Act (RULPA)
A revision of the ULPA that provides a more modern, comprehensive law for the formation, operation, and dissolution of limited partnerships.


Certificate of Limited Partnership

The creation of a limited partnership is formal and requires public disclosure. The entity must comply with the statutory requirements of the RULPA or other state statutes. Under the RULPA, two or more persons must execute and sign a certificate of limited partnership [RULPA Sections 201, 206]. The certificate must contain the following information:

•Name of the limited partnership.

•General character of the business.

•Address of the principal place of business and name and address of the agent to receive service of legal process.

•Name and business address of each general and limited partner.

•Latest date on which the limited partnership is to dissolve.

•Amount of cash, property, or services (and description of property or serv-ices) contributed by each partner and any contributions of cash, property, or services promised to be made in the future.

•Any other matters that the general partners determine to include.

The certificate of limited partnership must be filed with the secretary of state of the appropriate state and, if required by state law, with the county recorder in the county or counties in which the limited partnership carries on business. The limited partnership is formed when the certificate of limited partnership is filed. The certificate of limited partnership may be amended to reflect the addition or withdrawal of a partner and other matters [RULPA Section 202(a)].

Under the RULPA, the law of the state in which the limited partnership is orga-nized governs the partnership, its internal affairs, and the liability of its limited partners [RULPA Section 901].

Foreign Limited Partnership

A limited partnership is a domestic limited partnership in the state in which it is organized. It is a foreign limited partnership in all other states. Under the RULPA, the law of the state in which the entity is organized governs its organization, its internal affairs, and the liability of its limited partners [RULPA Section 901].







certificate of limited partnership

A document that two or more persons must execute and sign that makes a limited partnership legal and binding.



















domestic limited partnership

A limited partnership in the state in which it was formed.

foreign limited partnership

A limited partnership in all other states besides the one in which it was formed.


584PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics

Before transacting business in a foreign state, a foreign limited partnership must file an application for registration with that state’s secretary of state. If the application conforms to that state’s law, a certificate of registration permit-ting the foreign limited partnership to transact business will be issued [RULPA Section 902]. Once registered, a foreign limited partnership may use the courts of the foreign state to enforce its contracts and other rights [RULPA Section 907].




It is the privilege of a trader in a free country, in all mat-ters not contrary to law, to regulate his own mode of carrying it on according to his own discretion and choice.

Baron Alderson

Hilton v. Eckersly (1855)

Name of the Limited Partnership

The name of a limited partnership may not include the surname of a limited part-ner unless (1) it is also the surname of a general partner or (2) the business was carried on under that name before the admission of the limited partner [RULPA Section 102(2)]. A limited partner who knowingly permits his or her name to be used in violation of this provision becomes liable as a general partner to any creditors who extend credit to the partnership without actual knowledge of his or her true status [RULPA Section 303(d)].

Other restrictions on the name of a limited partnership are that (1) the name cannot be the same as or deceptively similar to the names of corporations or other limited partnerships, (2) states can designate words that cannot be used in limited partnership names, and (3) the name must contain, without abbreviation, the words limited partnership [RULPA Section 102].













defective formation

Incorrect creation of a limited partnership that occurs when (1) a certificate of limited partnership is not properly filed, (2) there are defects in a certificate that is filed, or (3) some other statutory require-ment for the creation of a limited partnership is not met.










limited partnership agreement (articles of limited partnership)

A document that sets forth the rights and duties of general and limited partners; the terms and conditions regarding the operation, termination, and dissolution of a partnership; and so on.

Capital Contributions

Under the RULPA, the capital contributions of general and limited partners may be in cash, property, services rendered, or promissory notes or other obliga-tions to contribute cash or property or to perform services [RULPA Section 501]. A partner or creditor of a limited partnership may bring a lawsuit to enforce a partner’s promise to make a contribution [RULPA Section 502(a)].

Defective Formation

Defective formation occurs when (1) a certificate of limited partnership is not properly filed, (2) there are defects in a certificate that is filed, or (3) some other statutory requirement for the creation of a limited partnership is not met. If there is a substantial defect in the creation of a limited partnership, persons who thought they were limited partners can find themselves liable as general partners.

Partners who erroneously but in good faith believe they have become limited partners can escape liability as general partners by either (1) causing the appro-priate certificate of limited partnership (or certificate of amendment) to be filed or

(2)withdrawing from any future equity participation in the enterprise and caus-ing a certificate showing this withdrawal to be filed. The limited partner remains liable to any third party who transacts business with the enterprise before either certificate is filed if the third person believed in good faith that the partner was a general partner at the time of the transaction [RULPA Section 304].

Limited Partnership Agreement

Although not required by law, the partners of a limited partnership often draft and execute a limited partnership agreement (also called the articles of limited partnership) that sets forth the rights and duties of the general and limited partners; the terms and conditions regarding the operations, termination, and dissolution of the partnership; and so on. Where there is no such agreement, the certificate of limited partnership serves as the articles of limited partner-ship.

It is good practice to establish voting rights in a limited partnership agree-ment or certificate of limited partnership. The limited partnership agreement


CHAPTER 35   Limited Partnerships and Special Partnerships	585

can provide which transactions must be approved by which partners (i.e., general, limited, or both). General and limited partners may be given unequal voting rights.


Share of Profits and Losses

A limited partnership agreement may specify how profits and losses from the limited partnership are to be allocated among the general and limited partners. If there is no such agreement, the RULPA provides that profits and losses from a limited partnership are shared on the basis of the value of each partner’s capital contribution [RULPA Section 503].

Example There are four general partners, each of whom contributes $50,000 in capi-tal to the limited partnership, and four limited partners, each of whom contributes $200,000 capital. The total amount of contributed capital is $1 million. The limited partnership agreement does not stipulate how profits and losses are to be allocated. Assume that the limited partnership makes $3 million in profits. Under the RULPA, each general partner would receive $150,000 in profit, and each limited partner would receive $600,000 in profit.

Right to Information

Upon reasonable demand, each limited partner has the right to obtain from the general partners true and full information regarding the state of the business, the financial condition of the limited partnership, and so on [RULPA Section 305]. In addition, the limited partnership must keep the following records at its principal office:

•A copy of the certificate of limited partnership and all amendments thereto.

•A list of the full name and business address of each partner.

•Copies of effective written limited partnership agreements.

•Copies of federal, state, and local income tax returns.

•Copies of financial statements of the limited partnership for the three most recent years.





















It is the spirit and not the form of law that keeps jus-tice alive.

Earl Warren

The Law and the Future (1955)


Admission of a New Partner

Once a limited partnership has been formed, a new limited partner can be added only upon the written consent of all partners, unless the limited partnership agreement provides otherwise. New general partners can be admitted only with the specific written consent of each partner [RULPA Section 401]. A limited part-nership agreement cannot waive the right of partners to approve the admission of new general partners. The admission is effective when an amendment of the certificate of limited partnership reflecting that fact is filed [RULPA Section 301].

The following feature discusses master limited partnerships.







master limited partnership (MLP)

A type of limited partnership that is listed on a stock exchange and is publicly traded to provide liquidity to investors.



Contemporary Environment

Master Limited Partnership


One of the major drawbacks for investors who are limited partners in a limited partnership is that their investment usu-ally is not liquid because there is no readily available market for buying and selling limited partnership interests. Certain limited partnerships can choose to be master limited partnerships (MLPs). An MLP is a limited partnership whose limited partner-

ship interests are traded on organized securities exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange. An investment in an MLP is liquid because it can be sold on the stock exchange. Shares of ownership in MLPs are referred to as units.

By law, MLPs may engage in only certain businesses, such as petroleum and natural gas extraction,

(continued)


586PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics


businesses involving pipelines for the transportation of natural resources, financial services, and some real estate enterprises. In most MLPs, a corporation remains the gen-eral partner of the MLP, and public investors are the limited partners. MLPs pay their investors quarterly required dis-tributions (QRDs) similar to interest payments on bonds, at an amount stated in the investment contract.
There are tax benefits to owning a limited partnership interest in an MLP rather than owning corporate stock.


MLPs pay no income tax; partnership income

and losses flow directly onto the individual partners’ income tax returns. Profits and other distributions of MLPs also avoid the double taxation of corporate divi-dends. In addition, limited partners may deduct their prorated share of the MLP’s depreciation on their per-sonal tax returns. Thus, MLPs combine the liquidity of publicly traded securities and the tax benefits of limited partnerships.













unlimited liability

General partners are personally liable for the debts and obligations of a limited partnership.









limited liability

Limited partners are liable only for the debts and obligations of a limited partnership up to their capital contribution, and are not personally liable for the debts and obligations of a limited partnership.













Four things belong to a judge: to hear courteously, to answer wisely, to con-sider soberly, and to decide impartially.

Socrates


Liability of General and Limited Partners

General partners and limited partners of a limited partnership have different degrees of liability, depending on the circumstances. The liability of general and limited partners is discussed in the following paragraphs.

Liability of General Partners

The general partners of a limited partnership have unlimited liability for the debts and obligations of the limited partnerships. Thus, general partners have unlimited personal liability for the debts and obligations of the limited partner-ship. This liability extends to debts that cannot be satisfied with the existing capital of the limited partnership.

The RULPA permits a corporation or limited liability company to be a general partner or the sole general partner of a limited partnership. Where this is permis-sible, this type of general partner is liable for the debts and obligations of the lim-ited partnership only to the extent of its capital contribution to the partnership.

Liability of Limited Partners

Generally, limited partners have limited liability for the debts and obligations of the limited partnership. Limited partners are liable only for the debts and obliga-tions of the limited partnership up to their capital contributions, and they are not personally liable for the debts and obligations of the limited partnership.

Example Gertrude and Gerald are the general partners of a limited partnership called Real Estate Development, Ltd. Lin, Leopold, Lonnie, and Lawrence are limited part-ners of the limited partnership and have each invested $100,000 in the limited part-nership. Real Estate Development, Ltd., borrows $2 million from City Bank. After six months, the limited partnership goes bankrupt, still owing City Bank $2 million. The limited partnership has spent all of its capital and is broke. In this case, the four lim-ited partners each lose their $100,000 capital investment but are not personally liable for the $2 million debt owed by the limited partnership to City Bank. The two general partners, however, are each personally liable to City Bank for the limited partnership’s unpaid $2 million loan to City Bank.

Liability on a Personal Guarantee

On some occasions, when limited partnerships apply for an extension of credit from a bank, a supplier, or another creditor, the creditor will not make the loan based on the limited partnership’s credit history or ability to repay the credit. The creditor may require a limited partner to personally guarantee the repayment of the loan in order to extend credit to the limited partnership. If a limited partner personally guarantees a loan made by a creditor to the limited partnership and the limited partnership defaults on the loan, the creditor may enforce the personal guarantee and recover payment from the limited partner who personally guaranteed the repayment of the loan.


CHAPTER 35   Limited Partnerships and Special Partnerships	587

Management of a Limited Partnership


Under partnership law, general partners have the right to manage the affairs of the limited partnership. On the other hand, as a trade-off for limited liability, lim-ited partners give up their right to participate in the control and management of the limited partnership. This means, in part, that limited partners have no right to bind the partnership to contracts or other obligations.

Under the RULPA, a limited partner is liable as a general partner if his or her participation in the control of the business is substantially the same as that of a general partner, but the limited partner is liable only to persons who reasonably believed him or her to be a general partner [RULPA Section 303(a)].


Permissible Activities of Limited Partners

The RULPA clarifies the types of activities that a limited partner may engage in without losing his or her limited liability. These activities include [RULPA Sections 303(b), 303(c)]:

•Being an agent, an employee, or a contractor of the limited partnership.

•Being a consultant or an advisor to a general partner regarding the limited partnership.

•Acting as a surety for the limited partnership.

•Approving or disapproving an amendment to the limited partnership agreement.

•Voting on the following partnership matters:

a.The dissolution and winding up of the limited partnership.

b.The sale, transfer, exchange, lease, or mortgage of substantially all of the assets of the limited partnership.

c.The incurrence of indebtedness by the limited partnership other than in the ordinary course of business.

d.A change in the nature of the business of the limited partnership.

e.The removal of a general partner.

Example Laura is an investor limited partner in a limited partnership. At some time after she becomes a limited partner, Laura thinks that the general part-ners are not doing a very good job managing the affairs of the limited partner-ship, so she participates in the management of the limited partnership. While she is doing so, a bank loans $1 million to the limited partnership, believing that Laura is a general partner because of her involvement in the management of the limited partnership. If the limited partnership defaults on the $1 million loan owed to the bank, Laura will be treated as a general partner and will be held personally liable for the loan, along with the general partners of the lim-ited partnership.

Example Assume that in the previous example, the general partners of the limited partnership vote to make Laura, a limited partner, president of the limited part-nership. Laura therefore has two distinct relationships with the limited partner-ship: first as an investor limited partner and second as a manager (president) of the limited partnership. In this case, Laura can lawfully participate in the management of the limited partnership without losing the limited liability shield granted by her limited partner status.
















Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.

John F. Kennedy

Inaugural speech,

January 20, 1961



CONCEPT SUMMARY

LIABILITY OF LIMITED PARTNERS OF A LIMITED PARTNERSHIP


General rule	Limited partners are not individually liable for the obligations of the partnership beyond the

amount of their capital contribution.

(continued)


588PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics


Exceptions to the general rule

Limited partners are individually liable for the debts and obligations of the partnership in three situations:

1.Defective formation. There has not been substantial compliance in good faith with the statutory requirements to create a limited partnership. Exception: Persons who erroneously believed themselves to be limited partners either (1) caused the appropriate certificate of limited partnership or amendment thereto to be filed or (2) withdrew from any future equity participation in the profits of the partnership and caused a certificate of withdrawal to be filed.

2.Participation in management. The limited partner participated in the management and control of the partnership. Exception: The limited partner was properly employed by the partnership as a manager or an executive.

3.Personal guarantee. The limited partner signed an enforceable personal guarantee to guarantee the performance of the limited partnership.






The following feature discusses a new issue of limited liability partnership law.



Contemporary Environment

Modern Rule Permits Limited Partners to Participate in Management


The general rule is that limited partners who take part in the management of the affairs of a limited partnership who have not been expressly elected to office to do so lose their limited liability shield and become general partners and are personally liable for the debts and obligations of the limited partnership. This is called the control rule.
The 2001 amendments to the RULPA make an impor-tant change to the control rule. The new Section 303 of the RULPA eliminates this restriction and permits limited partners to participate in the management of a limited partnership without losing their limited liability shield. The


limited liability partnership agreement can permit certain or all limited partners a say in how the partnership’s business should be run.

Section 303 places limited partners on par with share-holders of a corporation, members of a limited liability com-pany (LLC), and the partners of a limited liability partnership (LLP) in terms of being able to participate in the manage-ment of the entity without becoming personally liable for the debts and obligations of the limited partnership.
States may adopt this change as part of their own limited liability partnership law.










certificate of cancellation

A document that is filed with the secretary of state upon the dissolu-tion of a limited partnership.



Dissolution of a Limited Partnership

Just like a general partnership, a limited partnership may be dissolved and its affairs wound up. The RULPA establishes rules for the dissolution and winding up of limited partnerships. Upon the dissolution and the commencement of the winding up of a limited partnership, a certificate of cancellation must be filed by the limited partnership with the secretary of state of the state in which the lim-ited partnership is organized [RULPA Section 203].


Causes of Dissolution

Under the RULPA, the following four events cause the dissolution of a limited partnership [RULPA Section 801]:

1.The end of the life of the limited partnership, as specified in the certificate of lim-ited partnership (i.e., the end of a set time period or the completion of a project).


CHAPTER 35   Limited Partnerships and Special Partnerships	589

2.The written consent of all general and limited partners.

3.The withdrawal of a general partner. Withdrawal includes the retirement, death, bankruptcy, adjudged insanity, or removal of a general partner or the assignment by a general partner of his or her partnership interest. If a corpo-ration or partnership is a general partner, the dissolution of the corporation or partnership is considered withdrawal.

4.The entry of a decree of judicial dissolution, which may be granted to a part-ner whenever it is not reasonably practical to carry on the business in con-formity with the limited partnership agreement [RULPA Section 802] (e.g., if the general partners are deadlocked over important decisions affecting the limited partnership).

A limited partnership is not dissolved upon the withdrawal of a general partner if (1) the certificate of limited partnership permits the business to be carried on by the remaining general partner or partners or (2) within 90 days of the withdrawal, all remaining partners agree in writing to continue the business (and select a general partner or partners, if necessary) [RULPA Section 801].


Winding Up

A limited partnership must wind up its affairs upon dissolution. Unless other-wise provided in the limited partnership agreement, the partnership’s affairs may be wound up by the general partners who have not acted wrongfully or, if there are none, the limited partners. Any partner may petition the court to wind up the affairs of a limited partnership [RULPA Section 803]. A partner who winds up the affairs of a limited partnership has the same rights, powers, and duties as a partner winding up a general partnership.

Distribution of Assets

After the assets of a limited partnership have been liquidated, the proceeds must be distributed. The RULPA provides the following order of distribution of assets of a limited partnership upon the winding up of the partnership [RULPA Section 804]:

1.Creditors of the limited partnership, including partners who are creditors (except for liabilities for distributions).

2.Partners with respect to:

a.Unpaid distributions

b.Capital contributions

c.The remainder of the proceeds.

The partners may provide in the limited partnership agreement for a differ-ent distribution among the partners, but the creditors must retain their first priority.



Limited Liability Limited Partnership

The 2001 amendments to the RULPA permit a new form of entity called a limited liability limited partnership (LLLP). An LLLP may be organized under state law by filing articles of limited liability limited partnership with the sec-retary of state’s office. If all filing documents are correct and the proper fee is paid, the state will issue a certificate of limited liability limited partnership. An existing limited partnership may convert to being a LLLP. In most states, an LLLP must identify itself by using “L.L.L.P.” or “LLLP” after the partner-ship name.





limited liability limited partnership (LLLP)
A special type of limited partnership that has both general partners and limited partners, where both the general and limited partners have limited liability and are not person-ally liable for the debts of the LLLP.


590PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics

Liability of General and Limited Partners of an LLLP












Exhibit 35.2 LIMITED LIABILITY LIMITED PARTNERSHIP

Like a limited partnership, an LLLP requires at least one general partner and at least one limited partner. However, the difference between a limited partnership and an LLLP is that in an LLLP, the general partners are not jointly and severally person-ally liable for the debts and obligations of the LLLP. Thus, neither the general part-ners nor the limited partners have personal liability for the debts and obligations of the LLLP. The debts of an LLLP are solely the responsibility of the partnership (see Exhibit 35.2).



Limited	Debt or	
	obligation owed	Third
Liability		
		
Limited		Party
Partnership



Capital investment
























A lawyer with his briefcase can steal more than a hundred men with guns.

Mario Puzo

The Godfather





Limited	Limited	General	General
Partner	Partner	Partner	Partner
Liability limited	Liability limited
to capital			to capital
contribution	contribution
No personal liability	No personal liability
for partnership’s	for partnership’s
debts and obligations	debts and obligations


Typically, the general partners of an LLLP manage the partnership, and the limited partners are investors who only have a financial interest in the LLLP. Thus, a general partner can manage the affairs of the LLLP but not be personally responsible for the debts of the LLLP.

Many states currently offer the ability to form LLLPs. Other states are doing so as well. An LLLP is a domestic limited liability limited partnership in the state in which it is formed and a foreign limited liability limited partnership in other states in which it operates. Because the LLLP is a new form of business, its use is not wide-spread. Most use of the LLLP form of business has been for real estate investments.







Key Terms and Concepts

Articles of limited liabil-	Certificate of limited	Dissolution of a	Domestic limited part-
ity limited partnership	partnership (583)	limited partnership	nership (583)
(589)	Certificate of registration	(588)	Foreign limited liability
Certificate of cancella-	(584)	Distribution of assets of a	limited partnership
tion (588)	Control rule (588)	limited partnership	(590)
Certificate of limited	Decree of judicial disso-	(589)	Foreign limited partner-
liability limited	lution (589)	Domestic limited liability	ship (583)
partnership	Defective formation	limited partnership	General partner
(589)	(584)	(590)	(582)


	CHAPTER 35	Limited Partnerships and Special Partnerships	591
Limited liability limited	Limited partnership	Quarterly required	Uniform Limited	
partnership (LLLP)	agreement (articles of	distributions (QRDs)	Partnership Act	
(589)	limited partnership)	(586)	(ULPA) (583)	
Limited liability (586)	(584)	Revised Uniform Lim-	Unlimited liability	
Limited partner (582)	Master limited partner-	ited Partnership Act	(586)	
Limited partnership	ship (MLP) (585)	(RULPA) (583)	Winding up (589)	
(special partnership)	Personal guarantee	Section 303 of the		
(582)	(586)	RULPA (588)		


Critical Legal Thinking Cases


35.1 Liability of General Partners Pat McGowan, Val Somers, and Brent Robertson were general partners of Vermont Place, a limited partnership formed for the purpose of constructing duplexes on an undeveloped tract of land in Fort Smith, Arkansas. The general part-ners appointed McGowan and his company, Advance Development Corporation, to develop the project, in-cluding contracting with materials people, mechanics, and other suppliers. None of the limited partners took part in the management or control of the partnership.

Eight months later, Somers and Robertson discov-ered that McGowan had not been paying the suppliers. They removed McGowan from the partnership and took over the project. The suppliers sued the partnership to recover the money owed them. The partnership assets were not sufficient to pay all their claims. Who is li-able to the suppliers? National Lumber Company v. Advance Development Corporation, 293 Ark. 1, 732 S.W.2d 840, Web 1987 Ark. Lexis 2225 (Supreme Court of Arkansas)

35.2 Liability of Limited Partners Union Station As-sociates of New London (USANL) was a limited part-nership formed under the laws of Connecticut. Allen M. Schultz, Anderson Nolter Associates, and the Lepton Trust were limited partners. The limited partners did not take part in the management of the partnership. The National Railroad Passenger Association (NRPA) entered into an agreement to lease part of a railroad facility from USANL. NRPA sued USANL for allegedly breaching the lease and also named the limited partners as defendants. Are the limited partners liable? National Railroad Passenger Association v. Union Station Asso-ciates of New London, 643 F.Supp. 192, Web 1986 U.S. Dist. Lexis 22190 (United States District Court for the District of Columbia)

35.3 Liability of Limited Partners 8 Brookwood Fund (Brookwood) was a limited partnership that was formed to invest in securities. The original certificate of lim-ited partnership was filed with the Westchester County, New York, clerk; it listed Kenneth Stein as the general partner and Barbara Stein as the limited partner. With-in the next four months, additional investors joined Brookwood as limited partners. However, no certificate amending the original certificate was filed to reflect

the newly admitted limited partners. The newly added partners conducted themselves at all times as limited partners.

The partnership purchased securities on margin (i.e., it borrowed a percentage of the purchase price of the securities) from the securities firms Sloate, Weisman, Murray & Co., Inc. (Sloate), and Bear Stearns & Co., Inc. (Bear Stearns). One day, the stock market crashed, causing many of the securities that Brookwood had pur-chased to go down in value. The securities firms made margin calls on Brookwood to pay more money to cover the losses. When the margin calls were not met, Sloate and Bear Stearns immediately initiated arbitration pro-ceedings to recover the balance of $1,849,183 allegedly due after Brookwood’s accounts were liquidated. Nine days later, Brookwood filed a certificate amending the original certificate of limited partnership to reflect the recently added limited partners.

Upon receiving the notice of arbitration, the recently added limited partners renounced their interest in the profits of the limited partnership. Can these limited partners be held individually liable for the partnership debts owed to Sloate and Bear Stearns? 8 Brookwood Fund v. Bear Stearns & Co., Inc., 148 A.D.2d 661, 539 N.Y.S.2d 411, Web 1989 N.Y. App.Div. Lexis 4208 (Su-preme Court of New York)

35.4 Liability of Limited Partners Virginia Partners, Ltd. (Virginia Partners), a limited partnership orga-nized under the laws of Florida, conducted business in Kentucky but failed to register as a foreign limited partnership, as required by Kentucky law. Robert Day was tortiously injured in Garrard County, Kentucky, by a negligent act of Virginia Partners. At the time of the accident, Day was a bystander observing acid being in-jected into an abandoned oil well by Virginia Partners. The injury occurred when a polyvinyl chloride (PVC) valve failed, causing a hose to rupture from its fitting and spray nitric acid on Day, severely injuring him. Day sued Virginia Partners and its limited partners to recover damages. Are the limited partners liable? Vir-ginia Partners, Ltd. v. Day, 738 S.W.2d 837, Web 1987 Ky.App. Lexis 564 (Court of Appeals of Kentucky)

35.5 Liability of Partners Raugust-Mathwig, Inc., a corporation, was the sole general partner of a limited


592PART VIII   Business Organizations, Investor Protection, and Ethics


partnership. Calvin Raugust was the major shareholder of this corporation. The three limited partners were Cal-Lee Trust, W.J. Mathwig, Inc., and W.J. Mathwig, Inc., and Associates. All three of the limited partners were valid corporate entities. Although the limited part-nership agreement was never executed and a certificate of limited partnership was not filed with the state, the parties opened a bank account and began conducting business.

John Molander, an architect, entered into an agree-ment with the limited partnership to design a condo-minium complex and professional office building to be located in Spokane, Washington. The contract was signed on behalf of the limited partnership by its cor-porate general partner. Molander provided substantial architectural services to the partnership, but neither project was completed because of a lack of financing. Molander sued the limited partnership, its corporate general partner, the corporate limited partners, and Calvin Raugust individually to recover payments alleg-edly due him. Against whom can Molander recover? Molander v. Raugust-Mathwig, Inc., 44 Wash.App. 53, 722 P.2d 103, Web 1986 Wash.App. Lexis 2992 (Court of Appeals of Washington)

35.6 Limited Partnership The Courts of the Phoenix was a limited partnership that owned a building that housed several racquetball and handball courts. William

Reich was its general partner. Charter Oaks Fire Insur-ance Company (Charter Oaks) issued a fire insurance policy that insured the building. One day, a fire caused extensive damage to the building. When the Chicago fire department found evidence of arson, Charter Oaks de-nied the partnership’s $1.7 million-plus insurance claim. It reasoned that Reich had either set the fire or had ar-ranged to have it set in order to liquidate a failing invest-ment. Can the limited partnership recover on the fire in-surance policy? Courts of the Phoenix v. Charter Oaks Fire Insurance Company, 560 F.Supp. 858, Web 1983 U.S. Dist. Lexis 17792 (United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois)

35.7 Limited Partner’s Interest When the Chrysler Credit Corporation (Chrysler Credit) extended credit to Metro Dodge, Inc. (Metro Dodge), Donald P. Peter-son signed an agreement, guaranteeing to pay the debt if Metro Dodge did not pay. When Metro Dodge failed to pay, Chrysler Credit sued Peterson on the guarantee and obtained a judgment of $350,000 against him. Af-ter beginning collection efforts, Chrysler Credit learned through discovery that Peterson owned four limited partnership units in Cedar Riverside Properties, a lim-ited partnership. Can Chrysler Credit charge Peterson’s limited partnership interests? Chrysler Credit Corpo-ration v. Peterson, 342 N.W.2d 170, Web 1984 Minn. App. Lexis 2976 (Court of Appeals of Minnesota)



Ethics Cases


35.8 Ethics  Robert K. Powers and Lee M.  Solomon  were  among  other  limited partners of the Cosmopolitan Chinook Hotel (Cosmo-

politan), a limited partnership. Cosmopolitan entered into a contract to lease and purchase neon signs from Dwinell’s Central Neon (Dwinell’s). The contract identi-fied Cosmopolitan as a “partnership” and was signed on behalf of the partnership, “R. Powers, President.” At the time the contract was entered into, Cosmopolitan had taken no steps to file its certificate of limited partner-ship with the state, as required by limited partnership law. The certificate was not filed with the state until several months after the contract was signed. When Cosmopolitan defaulted on payments due under the contract, Dwinell’s sued Cosmopolitan and its general and limited partners. Have the limited partners acted ethically in denying liability on the contract? Are the limited partners liable? Dwinell’s Central Neon v. Cos-mopolitan Chinook Hotel, 21 Wash.App. 929, 587 P.2d 191, Web 1978 Wash.App. Lexis 2735 (Court of Appeals of Washington)

35.9 Ethics The Second Montclair Company was a limited partnership organized under the laws of Ala-bama to develop an office building in Birmingham called Montclair II. Joseph Cox, Sr., and F&S were general partners, each owning a one-third interest in the lim-ited partnership. Eleven limited partners owned equal shares of the remaining one-third interest. Cox was president of Cox Realty and Development Company (Cox Realty), which had its offices in Montclair II. Cox Realty managed Montclair II under a written agreement with the limited partnership. Evidence showed that Cox used assets of the limited partnership for personal use. F&S sued Cox, seeking dissolution and liquidation of the limited partnership and damages. Has Cox acted ethically in this case? Should the limited partnership be dissolved? Should damages be awarded? Cox v. F&S, 489 So.2d 516, Web 1986 Ala. Lexis 3448 (Supreme Court of Alabama)
