C H A P T E R 2
International Law and the World’s Legal Systems


INTRODUCTION
.......................................................................

This chapter examines the law of treaties, customary international law, principles of international jurisdic-tion, and the role of international organizations in fos-tering international laws and ideals. We will look not only at the historical development of international law, but how it addresses a range of current issues, particu-larly international business, commerce, and transna-tional crimes. Because much international law stems from international norms, we will also briefly look at developing norms for the social responsibility of multi-national corporations. Finally, we will take a compara-tive look at three of the major legal systems in place around the world today, including the common law, civil law, and Islamic legal systems.

INTERNATIONAL LAW
.......................................................................

The exact origins of international law, and whether it dates to antiquity or to the Middle Ages, is debatable. The ancient Greeks, Chinese, and Romans all recog-nized some rudimentary concepts of international law. However, the term international law is thought to be derived from the Latin term jus gentium, meaning “the law of nations.” That term was used in reference to that part of Roman law that governed public and private relations with foreigners and with the rulers of foreign lands.

Many legal historians believe that it was the rise of the European nation-state, first ruled by monarchs and later by sovereign governments, that led to the development of modern international law. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, legal scholars from Spain, Italy, and Holland developed the first modern European concepts of international law. In 1625, Hugo Grotius, a diplomat and lawyer for the Dutch East India Company, wrote On the Law of War and Peace, which brought together various schools


of thought on the nature of law and international obligations. It was a time of colonialism, trade, and the rise of nations. Grotius wrote that the law of nations was not just divinely given, as was commonly believed in his day, but also that law arose by common agreement, by consensus, and by the accepted practice of nations. He premised these ideas on the idea of national sovereignty and on the recognition that all states are equal. To this day, it is accepted that international law arises not from the work of some supranational legislature, but because nations have agreed to follow customary and accepted rules or norms and to comply with treaties and conventions on which they agree.

Definition and Characteristics of International Law

International law is the body of rules applicable to the conduct of nations in their relationships with other nations, and with individuals and other private parties, rules for settling disputes between nations, as well as rules for intergovernmental organizations. It can also include crimes and criminal procedures applicable to genocide, war crimes, and offenses against humanity committed by individuals in an official capacity.

International law has several characteristics that distinguish it from a country’s national or domestic law. First, instead of being dictated by a legislative body, international law consists of rules that countries agree to follow. It is lawmaking by choice and by consent. Indeed, international law exists because nations agree that it is in their best interests to cooperate and to conform to commonly accepted norms. Second, despite some commonly misunder-stood beliefs about the United Nations and other international bodies, there is no global authority for enforcing international law. It is true that inter-national courts and tribunals do issue judgments against nations. However, nations must agree to be a

29


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




party to these cases. The judgments are “binding” only according the authority of the court or tribunal under international law, and “hard” enforcement mechan-isms of the kind used in national law do not really exist. There are courts, but no international sheriffs or marshals. Enforcement of international law relies on remedies that countries have agreed to in advance, or on economic or political sanctions. International law relies greatly on “soft” enforcement mechanisms such as the force of public opinion, diplomacy, or the withholding of foreign aid or other assistance. Of course, the ultimate sanction against a country for violating international law is war, or at least the threat of it. But the use of force is also limited by international law. Later we will see that domestic and international courts do add to the enforcement capabilities of international law.

Public and Private International Law. There are many ways of classifying types of international law. Two broad categories are public international law and private international law. Public international law deals with those rules affecting the conduct of nations in their relationships with each other and with individuals as citizens or residents. For example, this might include rules for resolving territorial or boundary disputes, for conducting diplomacy or war, for determining national-ity, and for how nations treat foreign citizens. It also includes the rules governing the status and operation of intergovernmental organizations, such as the United Nations (UN) or the International Court of Justice.

Private international law deals with the rights and responsibilities of individuals, corporations, or other private parties in their cross-border or international activities, as well as procedural rules for how courts resolve private international disputes. For example, private international law might include family law and rules for international adoptions, wills and decedents’ estates who own property in more than one nation, and rules for international business transactions, such as sales contracts, international shipping, or the liability of commercial airlines to injured passengers.

Sources of International Law. The most frequently cited authority for the sources of international law is the Statute of the International Court of Justice, the judicial arm of the United Nations. It sets out both primary and secondary sources of international law. According to Article 38, the primary sources of international law are: (1) international treaties and conventions, (2) international custom, as evidence of a general practice accepted as law, and (3) the general



principles of law recognized by civilized nations. Secondary sources provide evidence of what interna-tional law might be or how it should be interpreted. These include the decisions of international courts and tribunals, and to a lesser extent, the scholarly writings of respected jurists and legal scholars. For example, in the United States, the Restatement of Foreign Relations Law, published by the American Law Institute, is considered a secondary source of customary law. Resolutions of the UN General Assembly are also a nonbinding secondary source. Like scholarly writings, UN resolutions are of persuasive value only.

We begin our study with treaties.

The Law of Treaties

Sovereign governments have been entering into military and trade alliances with one another for thousands of years. While treaties have always played an important role in international life, today they have taken on a new meaning. As the world becomes “smaller” and more interdependent, new issues take on global proportions requiring global solutions. Scientific and technological advances are proceeding more rapidly than ever before. Air and water pollution know no national boundaries. Illegal drug trafficking, terrorism, computer crime, and other crimes have taken on transnational dimensions. The problems we all face have one thing in common: Resolving each of them requires cooperation and agreement. Treaties are the most important form of international agreement and a primary source of international law.
A treaty is a legally binding agreement between two or more nations that is recognized and given effect under international law. A treaty between two countries is said to be bilateral, and a treaty between three or more countries is multilateral. One of the most important principles of treaty law is pacta sunt servanda (“the pact must be respected”), meaning that treaties are binding on the parties by consent and must be performed by them in good faith.

A convention is a legally binding multilateral treaty on matters of common concern, usually negotiated on a regional or global basis and open to adoption by many nations. Many conventions are negotiated under the auspices of the United Nations, the European Union, or the Council of Europe.

Other Treaty Terminology. An agreement that modi-fies or adds to a treaty or convention, or that deals with matters less significant than those dealt within



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	31




treaties, is known as a protocol . It usually addresses matters that are ancillary to a main treaty or convention. Nations adopt a treaty or convention when it is completed in its final form and is ready for nations to ratify. Nations that express their willingness to join a treaty are called signatories. Ratification is the formal agreement of a signatory nation to be bound by the treaty, usually by its own legislative approval. Countries that have ratified become con-tracting parties. A treaty becomes effective on the date set out in the treaty for it to “enter into force,” which is usually after some minimum number of nations become parties. A reservation is an exception to a treaty set out by a signatory country at the time of ratification. Abrogation is an act of a legislature that renders a treaty null and void.

A word of caution when referring to treaties by name: Many people abbreviate the names of treaties by referring to the name of the city in which the treaties were completed. Examples of common names are “the Vienna Convention,” and “the Montreal Convention.” Many treaties discussed in this book were completed in Madrid, Vienna, Geneva, Budapest, Kyoto, Montreal, Paris, Warsaw, and other cities. Some cities have been the site of many treaties. For example, a reference to the “the Vienna Convention” can either mean the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations or the Vienna Convention on Protection of the Ozone Layer— a big difference. Be careful when abbreviating treaty names.

The Legal Status and Domestic Law Effect of Treaties. To understand the legal effect of a treaty in a country that is a party to it, we must ask whether that treaty is self-executing or non-self-executing. A self-executing treaty (known in Europe as a treaty with “direct effect”) is one that automatically creates rights that are enforceable in the courts of that country, without any further legislative action. The treaty is immediately binding on courts, government agencies, and individuals. An example of a self-executing treaty enforceable by courts in the United States is the Montreal Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules for International Carriage by Air, that sets out the rights of airlines and airline passengers for personal injuries or damage to baggage or cargo on international flights.

Anon-self-executing treaty, or one without direct effect, is one that requires some additional legislative act before it becomes enforceable in national courts. In some countries, most notably the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia, few if any treaties have direct



effect. Treaties there require parliamentary action before they are enforceable by private parties. In a few other countries, such as the Netherlands and France, treaties are given greater legal effect. The status of treaties may be found in the written constitution of a country (if that country is one with a written constitution), in a legislative act, or by judicial interpretation. The legal status of treaties in the United States has been the subject of many federal appellate court decisions. Whether a treaty is self- executing or not depends on the wording and history of the treaty itself and the intent of Congress.

In Medellin v. Texas, 552 U.S. 491 (2008) the U.S. Supreme Court held that judgments of the Interna-tional Court of Justice (ICJ) were not enforceable by U.S. courts because the UN Charter, which created the ICJ, was non-self-executing. The case involved Jose Medellin, an 18-year-old Mexican national who had been arrested in the United States for murder. While in prison the International Court of Justice, sitting in The Hague, Netherlands, issued a judgment that Medellin (and 50 other Mexicans in U.S. prisons) had been deprived of rights under international law because Medellin had never been told that he had the right to notify the Mexican embassy of his arrest. The Court stated,

Article 94(1) [of the UN Charter] provides that “[e]ach Member of the United Nations undertakes to comply with the decision of the [ICJ] in any case to which it is a party.” The Executive Branch contends that the phrase “undertakes to comply” is not “an acknowledgement that an ICJ decision will have immediate legal effect in the courts of U.N. members,” but rather “a commitment on the part of U.N. Members to take future action through their political branches to comply with an ICJ decision.”

We agree with this construction of Article 94. The Article is not a directive to domestic courts. It does not provide that the United States “shall” or “must” comply with an ICJ decision, nor indicate that the Senate that ratified the U.N. Charter intended to vest ICJ decisions with immediate legal effect in domestic courts… . In other words, the U.N. Charter reads like “a compact between independent nations” that “depends for the enforcement of its provisions on the interest and the honor of the governments which are parties to it.”

Treaties of Friendship, Commerce, and Navigation. FCN treaties are bilateral agreements that provide a broad range of protection to foreign nationals doing


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




business in a host country. Most countries are party to many FCN treaties. In the United States, FCN treaties are self-executing. Although each treaty is different, they typically state that each country will allow the establishment of foreign branches or subsidiaries, the movement of capital and technology, the right of travel, and the right to own real estate. FCN treaties also assure the payment of just compensation for property taken




by government action and the nondiscriminatory treatment of personnel.

The following case, Ventress v. Japan Airlines, involves an FCN treaty between the United States and Japan in a case for wrongful termination of employ-ment. It illustrates the relationship between treaties and legislation, and that treaty interpretation is a matter for domestic courts.


Ventress v. Japan Airlines

486 F.3d 1111 (2007)	United States Court of Appeals (9th Cir.)


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Japan Airlines (JAL) is a Japanese air carrier based in Tokyo, with offices in California and Hawaii. The plaintiffs were employed by a Hawaiian company that contracted to perform services for JAL flights. They alleged that JAL had required a seriously ill pilot to fly, in violation of aviation laws. After expressing their concerns to a JAL official and to aviation regulators, they claimed they experienced harassment from superiors, including re-quired psychiatric evaluations, unsatisfactory evalua-tions, and termination. They sued in federal court seeking recovery for violation of California’s whistle blower protection statute and wrongful termination. The court dismissed the claims on the basis that the state statute had been preempted by the 1953 Treaty of Friendship, Commerce, and Navigation (FCN) between the United States and Japan. The plaintiffs appealed.

GOODWIN, CIRCUIT JUDGE

** * A treaty preempts inconsistent state law. United States v. Pink, 315 U.S. 203 (1942). [other citations omitted] Federal law must also be strictly construed to avoid conflict with treaty obligations. The district court premised its judgment on article VIII(1) of the Japan FCN Treaty, which provides:

Nationals and companies of either Party shall be permitted to engage, within the territories of the other Party, accountants and other technical experts, execu-tive personnel, attorneys, agents and other specialists of their choice … [emphasis added by court].

** * “The purpose of the Treaties was not to give foreign corporations greater rights than domestic companies, but instead to assure them the right to conduct business on an equal basis without suffering discrimination based on their alienage.” Sumitomo Shoji Am., Inc. v. Avagliano, 457 U.S. 176 (1982) (“Sumitomo II”). “The Treaties accomplished their purpose by granting foreign corporations ‘national treatment’ in most respects.” Id. at 188. National

treatment entitles a foreign national to “carry on his chosen business under conditions of non-discrimination, and to enjoy the same legal opportunity to succeed and prosper on his merits as is allowed citizens of the country.” MacNamara v. Korean Air Lines, 863 F.2d 1135, 1143 (3d Cir. 1988). * * *

Given the purpose and history of the FCN treaties, our sister circuits have consistently held that foreign employers do not enjoy immunity from domestic employment laws that do not interfere with the employers’ ability to hire their fellow citizens. In MacNamara, the Third Circuit considered a provision in the Korea FCN treaty that is identical in language to article VIII(1). The [U.S.] plaintiff, having been termi-nated by his Korean employer and replaced by a Korean citizen, sought recovery for race, national origin and age discrimination. The employer argued that it enjoyed treaty conferred immunity from federal anti-discrimination statutes. The court disagreed. The court explained that the treaty’s negotiating history “[w]as barren of any suggestion that Article VIII(1) was intended to achieve anything other than the right to utilize one’s own citizens in the capacities specified.”

** * Although the Korean employer had a treaty right to discriminate in favor of Korean citizens, the treaty afforded no immunity from liability for race, age and national origin discrimination. [emphasis added]

We hold that the district court erred by construing article VIII(1) to confer on Japanese employers blanket immunity from state employment law. * * * California’s whistle-blower protection laws merely prevent JAL from retaliating against employees for reporting and resisting the employer’s domestic law violations; the laws in no way conflict with JAL’s limited treaty right to discriminate in favor of Japanese citizens. In the absence of conflict, there can be no preemption.

Decision. Judgment reversed for plaintiffs. Although the FCN treaty does allow Japanese companies in the United States to give preference to hiring Japanese

citizens as executives, professional staff, and technical continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	33



continued

experts “of their choice,” it does not give them blan-	2.	What was the basis of the court’s ruling? Does the
ket  immunity  from  state  and  federal  employment		California whistle blower protection statute “inter-
laws.		fere with the employer’s ability to hire their fellow
Case Questions		citizens”?
	3.	In citing MacNamara v. Korean Airlines, the court
1.  What was the purpose of article VIII(1) of the FCN		refers to the difference between “citizenship” and
treaty? In what way would this give them greater		“national origin.” What is the difference, and why
control of their U.S. operations?		was that important here?
		


The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The interpretation of treaties is governed by customary international law rules. The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which became effective in 1980 in about half of the countries of the world, codified many of the customary rules. It covers such issues as when treaties enter into force, how they are interpreted or amended, and the rights and duties of contracting parties. Although the treaty has not been ratified by the United States, many U.S. courts apply its provisions as customary law.

Customary International Law

Custom has always been at the root of legal development, and that includes international law. Customary interna-tional law is a body of commonly accepted rules of conduct, or international norms, that have arisen out of consistent and long-standing practice, and that nations have followed out of a sense of binding obligation. Historically, examples of customary international law include rules for prosecuting the crimes of slavery, piracy, or genocide, rules for diplomatic immunity and the protection of ambassadors, rules for the inviolability of


embassies, rules that protect civilians during war, or rules governing the seizure of private vessels during wartime. The legal effect of customary international law is different from country to country. Even within the common law countries of the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia, there are differences. Some judges in the United Kingdom have held that customary norms are automatically a part of the common law. Other judges rely on customary norms for their persuasive value. On the other hand, in a landmark 1999 Australian case, the court held that crimes under customary law, like treaties, are not part of Australian domestic criminal law unless specifically enacted in legislation.

In recent years there has been increasing debate over whether customary international law is part of American law, and if so, which customs and norms are part of it and which are not. In the United States, however, it is generally accepted as a part of American law to be applied by courts where there is no contradictory statute or treaty and where there is no other way to resolve the case other than by applying customary norms. The following well-known decision of the U.S. Supreme Court, The Paquette Habana, reflects this view.


The Paquette Habana

175 U.S. 677 (1900)	United States Supreme Court


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

During the Spanish-American War, the United States Navy seized two commercial fishing ships sailing from Havana. The unarmed ships were owned by a Spanish citizen living in Cuba and sailed under Spanish flags. The owners were unaware of the hostilities between the United States and Spain and of the U.S. blockade of Cuba. The fishing ships were sold by the Navy in Florida as “prizes of war.” Their original owner sued for damages in U.S. District Court. The court upheld the seizure and the owner appealed.

JUSTICE GRAY

By an ancient usage among civilized nations, beginning centuries ago, and gradually ripening into a rule of international law, coast fishing vessels, pursuing their vocation of catching and bringing in fresh fish, have been recognized as exempt, with their cargoes and crews, from capture as prize of war * * *

The doctrine which exempts coast fishermen, with their vessels and cargoes, from capture as prize of war, has been familiar to the United States from the time of the War of Independence * * *

continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




continued



International law is part of our law, and must be ascertained and administered by the courts of justice of appropriate jurisdiction as often as questions of right depending upon it are duly presented for their deter-mination. For this purpose, where there is no treaty and no controlling executive or legislative act or judicial decision, resort must be had to the customs and usages of civilized nations, and, as evidence of these, to the works of jurists and commentators who by years of labor, research, and experience have made themselves peculiarly well acquainted with the subjects of which they treat. Such works are resorted to by judicial tribunals, not for the speculations of their authors concerning what the law ought to be, but for trustwor-thy evidence of what the law really is * * *

This review of the precedents and authorities of the subject appears to us abundantly to demonstrate that at the present day, by the general consent of the civilized nations of the world, and independently of any express treaty or other public act, it is an established rule of international law, founded on consideration of humanity to a poor and industrious order of men, and of the mutual

convenience of belligerent states, that coast fishing vessels, with their implements and supplies, cargoes and crews, unarmed and honestly pursuing their peaceful calling of catching and bringing in fresh fish, are exempt from capture as prize of war * * *

This rule of international law is one which prize courts administering the law of nations are bound to take judicial notice of, and to give effect to, in the absence of any treaty or other public act of their own government in relation to the matter * * *

Decision. The Supreme Court reversed and said that under an established rule of international law peaceful fishing vessels are exempt from capture as prizes of war. The Court acknowledged that it was bound to take judicial notice of international law.

Case Questions

1.Under what conditions is customary international law a part of U.S. domestic law?

2.Which international norm or custom applies to this dispute?



Limits on International Customary Law: The U.S. Alien Tort Statute. The U.S. Alien Tort Statute (ATS) was enacted in 1789. It gave the U.S. federal courts jurisdiction over civil actions for damages brought by non-U.S. citizens for torts committed against them by other non-citizens outside of the United States in violation of the norms of customary international law. For almost two hundred years the statute was seldom used. However, in the 1980s, a number of cases were brought under the statute to recover damages from U.S. companies accused of cooperating with foreign govern-



ments in abusing human rights. Many executives of U.S. multinational corporations were concerned that they could be sued in the United States by non-citizens who were accusing them of supporting, or participating in, human rights violations such as unfair or abusive labor practices, environmental damage, or worse (such as aiding and abetting foreign government-sponsored torture and killings). In the following case, Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, the court discussed the limitations on the incorporation of customary international law into U.S. law through the ATS.


Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain

542 U.S. 692 (2004)	United States Supreme Court


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Alvarez, a Mexican physician, was wanted by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency for the torture and murder of one of its agents in Mexico in 1985. When Mexico would not extradite Alvarez, the agency employed Sosa to kidnap Alvarez from his home and fly him by private plane to Texas, where he was arrested by federal officers. Alvarez was tried and acquitted in a U.S. court. After the acquittal, Alvarez brought this civil suit in U.S. District Court against Sosa for damages under the U.S.

Alien Tort Statute (ATS). The ATS reads: “The district courts shall have original jurisdiction of any civil action by an alien for a tort only, committed in violation of the law of nations or a treaty of the United States.” 28 U.S.C. §1350. Alvarez sued on the theory that the abduction and arrest were a tort committed in violation of customary international law. Alvarez won a judg-ment against Sosa in District Court, and it was upheld by the U.S. Court of Appeals. Sosa appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	35



continued



JUSTICE SOUTER

Alvarez says that the ATS was intended … as authority for the creation of a new cause of action for torts in violation of international law. We think that reading is implausible. As enacted in 1789, the ATS … bespoke a grant of jurisdiction, not power to mold substantive law. * * *

“When the United States declared their indepen-dence, they were bound to receive the law of nations, in its modern state of purity and refinement.” Ware v. Hylton, 3 Dall. 199 (1796). [William Blackstone, in 4 Commentaries on the Laws of England 68 (1769)] … mentioned three specific offenses against the law of nations addressed by the criminal law of England: violation of safe conducts, infringement of the rights of ambassadors, and piracy. An assault against an ambassador, for example, impinged upon the sover-eignty of the foreign nation and if not adequately redressed could rise to an issue of war. It was this narrow set of violations of the law of nations, admitting of a judicial remedy and at the same time threatening serious consequences in international affairs, that was probably on minds of the men who drafted the ATS with its reference to tort. * * *

The second inference to be drawn from the history is that Congress intended the ATS to furnish jurisdiction for a relatively modest set of actions alleging violations of the law of nations … As Blackstone had put it, “offences against this law [of nations] are principally incident to whole states or nations,” and not individuals seeking relief in court. 4 Commentaries 68. * * *

[A]lthough the ATS is a jurisdictional statute creat-ing no new causes of action, the reasonable inference from the historical materials is that the statute was intended to have practical effect the moment it became law. The jurisdictional grant is best read as having been enacted on the understanding that the common law would provide a cause of action for the modest number of international law violations with a potential for personal liability at the time.

We think it is correct, then, to assume that the First Congress understood that the district courts would recognize private causes of action for certain torts in violation of the law of nations, though we have found no basis to suspect Congress had any examples in mind beyond those torts corresponding to Blackstone’s three primary offenses: violation of safe conducts, infringement of the rights of ambassadors, and piracy.

Accordingly, we think courts should require any claim based on the present-day law of nations to rest on a norm of international character accepted by the civilized world and defined with a specificity

comparable to the features of the eighteenth-century paradigms we have recognized. This requirement is fatal to Alvarez’s claim. * * * Since many attempts by federal courts to craft remedies for the violation of new norms of international law would raise risks of adverse foreign policy consequences, they should be under-taken, if at all, with great caution. * * *

[Alvarez] attempts to show that prohibition of arbitrary arrest has attained the status of binding customary international law. * * * It is this position that Alvarez takes now: that his arrest was arbitrary and as such forbidden by international law not because it infringed the prerogatives of Mexico, but because no applicable law authorized it. * * * Alvarez cites little authority that a rule so broad has the status of a binding customary norm today. He certainly cites nothing to justify the federal courts in taking his broad rule as the predicate for a federal lawsuit, for its implications would be breathtaking. His rule would support a cause of action in federal court for any arrest, anywhere in the world, unauthorized by the law of the jurisdiction in which it took place, and would create a cause of action for any seizure of an alien in violation of the Fourth Amendment. * * *

Whatever may be said for the broad principle Alvarez advances, in the present, imperfect world, it expresses an aspiration that exceeds any binding customary rule having the specificity we require. It is enough to hold that a single illegal detention of less than a day, followed by the transfer of custody to lawful authorities and a prompt arraignment, violates no norm of customary international law so well defined as to support the creation of a federal remedy.


Decision. Judgment reversed for Sosa. Alvarez’s ar-rest did not violate any norm of customary international law that would permit an action for damages under the Alien Tort Statute. Recovery under the ATS should be limited to well-defined violations of norms of interna-tional law that are accepted by the civilized world, “prin-cipally incident to whole states or nations, and not individuals seeking relief in court.” The abduction and arrest in this case did not meet that standard.

Comment. In Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., 133 S.Ct. 1659 (2013), the Supreme Court held that, per-haps with the exception of piracy on the high seas, the First Congress in 1789 did not intend that the ATS would apply extraterritorially (outside the United States). In Kiobel, Nigerian nationals residing in the United States sued Dutch, British, and Nigerian oil com-panies under the ATS for allegedly aiding and abetting the Nigerian government in the torture and execution of

continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




continued

Nigerian environmentalists who were protesting oil ex-	tory of another sovereign; pirates may well be a cate-
ploration in Nigeria. The Court referred to its warning in	gory unto themselves.” Id. at 1667.
Sosa that lawsuits under the ATS should not be permit-	Case Questions
ted where they would cause “unwarranted judicial inter-	
ference in the conduct of foreign policy.” The Court	1.	What were the three specific offenses mentioned
stated, “These concerns … are all the more pressing		by Blackstone that were recognized as violations
when the question is whether a cause of action under		of customary international law at the time the
the ATS reaches conduct within the territory of another		ATS was enacted?
sovereign.” 133 S.Ct. at 1664, 1665. The Court stated	2.	Is the Court willing to expand the ATS beyond
that although the ATS could be applied to violations of		these original three offenses? According to Justice
safe conduct and assaults on ambassadors within the		Souter, what types of torts would give rise to
United States, it could not be applied outside the United		jurisdiction under the ATS?
States. With regard to whether piracy on the high seas	3.	Do you feel that this decision grants too much or
could be a violation of international customary law, the		too little power to the federal courts to hear tort
Court noted, “Pirates were fair game wherever found,		claims occurring outside the country?
by any nation, because they generally did not operate	4.	What foreign policy implications are involved in a
within any jurisdiction. We do not think that the exis-		U.S. court hearing a case under the ATS?
tence of a cause of action against them is a sufficient	5.	In what way did the Supreme Court’s subsequent
basis for concluding that other causes of action under		decision in Kiobel further limit the application of
the ATS reach conduct that does occur within the terri-		customary international law?
		



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS LAW AND CRIMES
.......................................................................

In this book, international business law (IBL) is the body of law and regulations, derived from national and international sources, that governs cross-border busi-ness transactions, the activities of those doing business in foreign countries or subject to the jurisdiction of foreign courts, and the resolution international busi-ness disputes. IBL includes both public and private in-ternational law, and overlaps with “international economic law,” a term used by some international law-yers. Several main subject areas of IBL that we intro-duced in the last chapter are international trade and transportation (import and exports), the international aspects of licensing and protecting intellectual prop-erty, foreign direct investment, and the operations of firms in foreign host countries.

Sources of International Business Law

IBL today is found in modern treaties, multilateral conventions, statutes, the acts of government depart-ments and agencies, court decisions, and the decisions of international courts and tribunals. However, many basic concepts of modern IBL developed over centu-ries from the law merchant and maritime law—the


accepted customs and practices of ancient and medieval merchants, traders, bankers, mariners, and ship owners. The practices were local at first, but spread rapidly as people began sharing customs and learning that consistent rules were enhancing com-merce. Soon private merchant courts and maritime courts in port cities were adopting these customs. Kings and princes were permitting this self-governance because it functioned well to enhance commerce, and that increased tax revenues. A few centuries later the same customs were influencing legislative codes in the new nation-states of continen-tal Europe, and the common law and admiralty courts in England were relying on them as precedents in their written judgments. Many of the same rules, in modern form, are now found in negotiable instruments law, sales and contract law, maritime and shipping law, insurance law, and many other areas.

One important modern code—embodied in an international convention—is the UN Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods. We will cover this is some detail later in the book. The code was written by legal scholars of commercial law from around the world, brought together over the course of many years by the UN Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), located in Vienna. The code covers subjects similar to those in Article 2 of the Uniform Commercial Code, the primary body of sales


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	37




law in the United States. However, the UN code applies to international sales between a buyer and seller in countries that are party to the convention. This includes most trading nations of the world today.

Another source of IBL are the non-binding stan-dards of conduct, or guidelines, published by respected international organizations and disseminated world-wide. Examples include standards for the fair treatment and protection of workers in a developing country, a set of voluntary standards for socially responsible cor-porations, or recommendations for the protection of the environment. Although these are not technically “law” and may not be enforceable in courts of law, there exists a “soft enforcement” mechanism by virtue of their moral authority and the willingness of companies to comply in the face of public opinion. In some cases these norms do find their way into binding legal codes. Universal norms and standards are therefore consid-ered a source of IBL. We will discuss a few of these later in this chapter.

Uniformity in International Business Law. Business functions best when law is clear and predictable. This lets people know the legal ramifications of future business plans and tells them their rights and obligations in advance of entering into business arrangements. This is especially true for firms operating in different countries. Complying with the maze of laws and regulations is difficult enough at home; it might be far too dangerous to embark on a business venture in a foreign country, if the laws there are unpredictable, arbitrary, unfair to foreign-ers, or just unknown. Despite its many differences worldwide, IBL has become more uniform between countries and regions of the world for several reasons:

1.The forces of free trade, economic integration, and the globalization of business have accelerated the need for greater uniformity in the law for international business.

2.Nations have had to cooperate in their legal responses to global issues, common problems, and technologies. For example, as intellectual property, ecommerce, and other technologies have grown in economic importance, IBL has adapted to keep pace.

3.Intergovernmental organizations such as the UN and the World Trade Organization have played an important role by producing uniform codes on many business subjects, from food safety to contract law.

4.International tribunals for dispute resolution have caused the greatest change in IBL in the modern era. They issue written reports and render



judgments affecting national laws that do not conform to international treaties or customary international law.

5.The roles of private industry organizations and trade associations have had an important role in encouraging the growth of uniform IBL. One prominent example is the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris, which has developed standard terms for international business con-tracts, arbitration, and international banking. While not “law,” these customs and practices are regularly incorporated into business and banking contracts, and are relied on by business people and international lawyers and applied by courts in legal disputes.

Why International Business Law Retains Its National Character. Although IBL has become more uniform, there are important reasons why it remains diverse and “national” in character:

1.National courts interpret and apply IBL according to their own legal rules, case precedents, and histories.
2.Differences in national legal systems reflect different legal and regulatory approaches to business law. For example, legal systems may be based on the common law of English tradition, on the civil law of European, Scandinavian, or Latin American tradition, on state socialist law, on religious law, or on mix of these.

3.The level of socioeconomic development in a country influences its legal development. It depends, for example, if a country has an industrialized economy like the United States, if it is a developing country, or if it has an agrarian economy.

4.National attitudes toward economics affect attitudes toward law and regulation. For example, one country may have a strong tradition of private enterprise and a free market economy. Other countries may believe in greater government regulation, more government ownership of industry, and more control over business. Some countries may pursue free trade and investment policies, while others may take a protectionist approach.

Crimes Related to International Business

Another special issue in the field of international law is that of jurisdiction for crimes. While jurisdiction is the power of a court to act, criminal jurisdiction is the power of a court to hear a criminal case and to act


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




over a defendant. Today jurisdiction has become an important international issue because just as business has become more international, so too has criminality. We all understand that nations have jurisdiction over crimes that occur within their territorial borders—“territorial jurisdiction.” But what if a crime that affects citizens or their national interests within the country is committed outside of a country?

Transnational Organized Crime. Before we return to the question of jurisdiction, let’s mention two major types of international crime. One type is transnational organized crime. Examples include the illegal drug and firearms trade, smuggling, human trafficking, prosti-tution and sex crimes, cybercrime, counterfeiting, ocean piracy, money laundering, and similar crimes. This might be the work of the Russian or Sicilian mafias, the Japanese yakuza, Colombian drug cartels, Chinese triad, or one of many gangs that engage in organized crime at the international level—a serious issue for law enforcement.

Transnational Business Crime. Another type of international crime is transnational business crime, including crimes that occur incident to or in the course of legitimate business, and that either take place across national borders or have an effect in more than one country. Sometimes referred to as “white collar crime” or “economic crime,” these include bribery and corruption, tax evasion, customs fraud, criminal violations of export control laws, business fraud, financial crimes, criminal violations of environmental laws, securities laws, and antitrust laws. The perpetrator might be an individual business person or the corporate entity itself.

UN Convention Against Corruption. The UN Con-vention Against Corruption (2003) has 165 contracting parties, including the United States. It calls for nations to

(1)criminalize the offering or giving of a bribe or undue advantage to a public official, including a foreign official, to influence his or her official acts or to obtain business;

(2)criminalize money laundering (passing money through otherwise legitimate businesses or banks to disguise its illicit origins); (3) improve enforcement by changing national bank secrecy laws so that the illicit proceeds of crimes can be tracked, identified, and seized; and (4) establish corporate criminal liability for legal entities. Some of these concepts are already a part of the national laws of many countries, including the United States, but not of all countries. One positive effect of more uniform laws against bribery and corruption is that it would level the business “playing field,” allowing



government contracts to go to the most efficient companies worldwide or to those that produced the best product or service at the best price, instead of to the most corrupt companies located in countries with the most lax laws. American business and government leaders and others around the world recognize this positive benefit.

Criminal Jurisdiction and the Extraterritorial Reach of Domestic Law

In a world where national political and economic interests span the globe, it is more important than ever for countries to deal with transnational crime—to protect their interests and the interests of their citizens. To set the stage, consider these jurisdictional problems:

•Industry executives from competing firms in the United States meet on a golf course on a Caribbean Island to fix prices and divide up territories among them in the U.S. market. On what jurisdictional grounds can these executives be prosecuted in the United States?

•An American businessperson doing business in Kuwait pays a cash bribe to a Kuwaiti government or military official to obtain business. Can the U.S. government arrest and prosecute this American on his or her return home?

•An executive of a Canadian corporation knowingly causes the discharge of a toxic waste into a river that runs into the United States. It poisons most life in the river for miles downstream and renders the water unsuitable for use.

Can the business executive be prosecuted for crimes in both countries?
•A citizen of Russia, living in London, attacks and disrupts a major computer network in the United States. Where can he or she be tried?

What would happen in these cases? There are several issues raised here: May a country pass laws affecting conduct outside its territory? May it exert jurisdiction over individuals or corporations outside its territory? And if so, does this include jurisdiction only over its own citizens who commit crimes abroad, or also over foreign individuals and foreign corporations? The answers to these questions are often “yes,” although it does depend on the facts of each case and the laws of each country involved.

The principle that a nation can project its laws—its jurisdiction—beyond its territorial borders is known as extraterritoriality or extraterritorial jurisdiction. It applies to both civil and criminal statutes, although our discussion here applies to criminal law. All


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	39




countries have different views toward the use of extraterritoriality. Some countries, such as the United States, are more willing to project their laws to individuals in foreign countries than, say, Canada or the countries of Europe. In the United States many criminal statutes affecting business apply extraterrito-rially. These include statutes on discrimination in employment, price-fixing and antitrust violations, securities laws, transportation of counterfeit films and other intellectual property, interference with a flight crew, trading with the enemy during time of war, country embargoes, banking and financial crimes, bribery, and more.

We are not speaking of any one country becoming the world’s police force. Extraterritorial jurisdiction does not mean that one nation’s law enforcement officials can enter another to make arrests. Normally, it requires a measure of compromise and mutual assistance in law enforcement. Any attempt by one country to enforce its laws against a citizen of another country might be very controversial and viewed as a violation of a country’s sovereignty. It can even prompt diplomatic or trade retaliation. As a result, courts say there is a presumption that national laws do not have extraterritorial reach, particularly where they conflict with international law or the laws of another nation. This helps to avoid conflicts in foreign relations. Extraterritoriality is least controversial when it is done by international agreement. A U.S. criminal statute may be applied extraterritorially if the language and history of the statute shows that Congress had intended for it to apply outside the United States. Jurisdiction must also be based on one of the following five basic principles: territoriality, nationality, the protective principle, passive personal-ity, and universality.

Territoriality. Territoriality or territorial jurisdic-tion refers to a nation’s jurisdiction over all persons (citizens and noncitizens), places, and property within the territory, airspace, or territorial waters of a country and to crimes committed on vessels flying that nation’s flag. In the case of jurisdiction for crimes, subjective territorial jurisdiction exists where a crime was actually committed within the territory. It is the least controversial form of exerting state power because it does not directly interfere with the sovereignty of other nations. Objective territorial jurisdiction, also called the “effects” principle, exists where an act was committed outside a country’s territory, but had a substantial effect inside the



country. An example of objective territorial jurisdic-tion in criminal law is the prosecution of foreign citizens in U.S. courts for attempting to smuggle illegal drugs into the United States aboard a foreign-flag ship in international waters.

Nationality. Under the principle of nationality jurisdiction, individuals and corporate citizens owe duties to comply with the laws of their countries of nationality no matter where they are in the world. It is considered one of the obligations of citizenship. For example, an American banker in Hong Kong must comply with both Hong Kong and U.S. banking laws. If an executive order of the president states that no funds may be transferred to an account of a party believed to support international terrorism, then the American in Hong Kong is bound just as though he or she were in the United States. In another example a country may tax the income of its citizens earned anywhere in the world, subject of course to certain rules set out in international treaties on income taxation.

Protective Jurisdiction. The protective principle allows jurisdiction over noncitizens for acts commit-ted abroad on the basis of a country’s need to protect its national security, vital economic interests, and governmental functions. Protective jurisdiction has been used as a basis of extraterritorial jurisdiction to prosecute terrorism, espionage, counterfeiting, making false statements to customs and immigration officers, and falsifying U.S. government documents (such as passports and visas). In one reported case, it was the basis for prosecuting a foreign citizen who conspired with an American to set up a sham marriage for the sole purpose of gaining entrance to the United States.

Passive Personality. Passive personality jurisdiction gives a country the right to hear cases stemming from crimes committed against their own citizens by non-citizens outside of their own territories. Passive personality is controversial because the only connec-tion to the prosecuting nation may be the nationality of the victim. This raises the question of whether one nation should attempt to criminalize and prosecute acts committed by foreign citizens in foreign coun-tries. Most countries, including the United States, have been reluctant to rely only on passive personality for jurisdiction and are willing to exercise it only in the case of heinous crimes, such as terrorism or other crimes with a significant nexus to the United States. One case, United States v. Roberts, 1 F. Supp. 2d 601


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




(E.D.La.1998), involved a sexual assault of an Ameri-can minor aboard a cruise ship in international waters by a non- U.S. citizen working aboard. The ship was registered in Panama and was flying the flag of Liberia. On the perpetrator’s prosecution in the United States, the court held that there was passive personality jurisdiction because the ship had departed on its cruise from Miami; the ship’s corporate officers were located in Miami; the company’s stock was traded on the New York Stock Exchange; and a trial in the United States would not infringe the sovereignty of any other nation.


Universal Jurisdiction. Finally, the universality prin-ciple of jurisdiction permits any country to prosecute perpetrators of the most heinous and universally condemned crimes regardless of where the crimes occurred or the nationality of the perpetrators or victims. The main offenses universally punishable are piracy, slavery, war crimes, torture, genocide, crimes against humanity, and extrajudicial killings. One famous case of universality is Israel’s 1961 public trial of Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann for holocaust atrocities com-mitted in Europe during World War II. However, in more recent years, universality jurisdiction has not been widely in use.

Interestingly, acts of terrorism have not been held to fall within universal jurisdiction. As a result, prosecution of a terrorist must be based on one of the other jurisdictional grounds. In U.S. v. Ramzi Yousef, 327 F.3d 56 (2d Cir. 2003), the defendant was convicted of conspiracy to bomb an American-flagged airline in Asia. On appeal he argued that the U.S. statute on destruction of aircraft could not be applied




outside the United States. The court rejected the argument, stating that jurisdiction was consistent with a treaty and with three of the five principles of customary international law criminal jurisdiction— objective territorial, protective, and passive personal-ity. The court stated

First, jurisdiction… is consistent with the “passive personality principle” of customary international jurisdiction because [this] involved a plot to bomb United States-flag aircraft that would have been carrying United States citizens and crews and that were destined for cities in the United States. Moreover … jurisdiction is appropriate under the “objective territorial principle” because the purpose of the attack was to influence United States foreign policy and the defendants intended their actions to have an effect—in this case, a devastating effect— on and within the United States. Finally, there is no doubt that jurisdiction is proper under the “protective principle” because the planned attacks were intended to affect the United States and to alter its foreign policy.

The court went on to say that terrorism, unlike genocide, had not yet risen to a crime under customary international law. Noting the cliché that “one man’s terrorist is another man’s freedom fighter,” the court felt that there was yet no universal definition of “terrorism” and thus universal jurisdic-tion could not apply.

In the following case, United States v. Campbell, a federal court permitted the prosecution in the United States of an Australian citizen arrested in India for a business crime committed against the U.S. government in Afghanistan. The court discusses extraterritoriality both under United States and international law.



United States v. Campbell

798 F. Supp. 2d 293 (2011)	United States District Court (D.D.C.)


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Campbell, an Australian citizen, was employed in the construction of health care facilities and schools in Afghanistan. The projects were funded by a U.S. government agency that extends financial and techni-cal assistance to foreign countries to support U.S. foreign policy objectives. Campbell was on a panel that selected subcontractors to work on projects. The U.S. government alleged that Campbell demanded and received a cash payment in return for granting

$14 million worth of work to a subcontractor. The money had been paid by an undercover federal investigator in Kabul, Afghanistan, posing as an agent of the subcontractor. Campbell was indicted in the United States for bribery (18 U.S.C. Sec. 666), arrested in India several months later, and brought to the United States for prosecution. Campbell moved for dismissal claiming that his prosecution was barred because the events occurred outside the United States, he is not an American citizen, prosecution would violate his due

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	41



continued



process rights, and his prosecution would violate international customary law.

ROSEMARY M. COLLYER, DISTRICT JUDGE

** * Courts have long recognized a presumption against reading a statute to have extraterritorial effect. “It is a ‘longstanding principle of American law that legislation of Congress, unless a contrary intent appears, is meant to apply only within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States.’” Morrison v. Nat’l Australia Bank Ltd., 561 U.S. ––––, 130 S.Ct. 2869 at 2877 (2010). [most citations omitted].

Despite this seemingly unequivocal pronouncement, the Supreme Court earlier cautioned that “the same rule of interpretation should not be applied to criminal statutes which are, as a class, not logically dependent on their locality for the Government’s jurisdiction, but are enacted because of the right of the Government to defend itself against obstruction, or fraud wherever perpetrated, especially if committed by its own citizens, officers or agents.” United States v. Bowman, 260 U.S. 94, 98, (1922).
** * Bowman concerned a … “conspiracy to defraud … the United States … after defendants submitted a false claim for fuel oil for one of its steamships. [T]he Supreme Court reasoned:

Crimes against private individuals or their property, like assaults, murder, burglary, larceny, robbery, arson, embezzlement, and frauds of all kinds, which affect the peace and good order of the community, must of course be committed within the territorial jurisdiction of the government where it may prop-erly exercise it. If punishment of them is to be extended to include those committed outside of the strict territorial jurisdiction, it is natural for Congress to say so in the statute, and failure to do so will negative the purpose of Congress in this regard …

But the same rule of interpretation should not be applied to criminal statutes which are, as a class, not logically dependent on their locality for the Govern-ment’s jurisdiction, but are enacted because of the right of the Government to defend itself against obstruction, or fraud wherever perpetrated, especially if committed by its own citizens, officers, or agents. Some such offenses can only be committed within the territorial jurisdiction of the government because of the local acts required to constitute them. Others are such that to limit their locus to the strictly territorial jurisdiction would be greatly to curtail the scope and usefulness of the statute and leave open a large immunity for frauds as easily committed by citizens on the high seas and in foreign countries as at home.

In such cases, Congress has not thought it necessary to make specific provision in the law that the locus shall include the high seas and foreign coun-tries, but allows it to be inferred from the nature of the offense. * * *

Mr. Campbell argues that his prosecution violates customary international law. “[I]nternational law itself imposes limits on the extraterritorial jurisdiction that a domestic court may exercise. It generally recognizes five theories of jurisdiction, the objective territorial, national, passive, protective and universal.” Tel-Oren v. Libyan Arab Republic, 726 F.2d 774 (D.C.Cir. 1984). An act of Congress should not be construed in a manner that violates the laws of nations if a non-violative interpretation is possible. Hartford Fire Ins. Co. v. California, 509 U.S. 764, (1993).

Here, the protective principal—specifically articu-lated in Bowman—supports the prosecution of Mr. Campbell. “The protective principle permits a nation to assert jurisdiction over a person whose conduct outside the nation’s territory threatens the nation’s security or could potentially interfere with the opera-tion of its governmental functions.” United States v. Romero-Galue, 757 F.2d 1147 (11th Cir. 1985); Bribery in connection with contracts backed by U.S. financing is illegal precisely because it implicates and adversely affects the interests and purse of the United States. The United States has the right “to defend itself against obstruction, or fraud wherever perpetrated.” [Bowman]. The protective principle amply supports prosecution of Mr. Campbell in this Court.

Decision. Motion to dismiss is denied. The defen-dant’s prosecution under this statute for bribery occur-ring outside the United States does not violate the principle against extraterritorial application of U.S. law because, under U.S. v. Bowman (cited above), the gov-ernment has an interest in protecting itself from fraud wherever it occurs. The statue does not violate interna-tional customary law because it falls within the protec-tive jurisdiction.

Comment. The court also held that because of the real harm done to the United States, there was a sufficient “nexus” or connection to the United States such that prosecution was not unreasonable or fundamentally un-fair in violation of the defendant’s constitutional rights.

Case Questions

1.If Congress did not state in the statute that it applied outside the U.S., how did the court arrive at its conclusion?

2.What is meant by the “Bowman Exception?”



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
.......................................................................

The most important international judicial body is the International Court of Justice, or ICJ. Formed in 1945 as the primary judicial arm of the United Nations, the ICJ is the arbiter of international law disputes between nations—cases brought by nations, against nations. It sits at The Hague, Netherlands, and bases its work on the Statute of the International Court of Justice. The fifteen independent judges are selected from the lead-ing jurists and scholars of international law on a worldwide basis. Individuals and private corporations are not parties to cases before the ICJ (although one nation may bring an action against another nation alleging a violation of the rights of one of their citi-zens under international law). In addition to dispute resolution the ICJ renders non-binding advisory opi-nions to the UN.

Specifically, the ICJ has jurisdiction over cases brought under the UN Charter or that involve a treaty, convention, international obligation, or question of international law. Jurisdiction over any nation is completely voluntary in that no nation must appear unless it consents to jurisdiction. Nations that agree in advance to submit certain types of cases to the ICJ are said to have submitted to compulsory jurisdiction, although this too is voluntary and may be withdrawn.

The ICJ’s judgments are made public, and there is no appeal. The judgments are binding only on the parties to the case, and not to all nations of the world. They are enforced primarily on the basis of world public opinion, diplomatic pressure, and good faith of the countries involved. In a principle established in the Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzów (Poland v.




Germany, P.C.I.J., 1927), decided by the Permanent Court of International Justice, the forerunner of the modern ICJ, any violation of an international obliga-tion requires the payment of financial reparations or damages. Typical cases heard by the ICJ have included land and maritime boundary disputes and the use of waterways; unlawful detaining of diplomats (e.g., Iran holding U.S. diplomats hostage in 1979); violations of sovereignty by neighboring armies (e.g., Uganda’s plundering of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the killing and torture of civilians from 1996– 2001); violations of humanitarian law (e.g., Bosnia and Serbia from 1992–1995); violations of human rights (e.g., the ICJ’s 2003 decision holding that the United States had violated the rights of 51 Mexican citizens on death row in the United States by not permitting them to have the assistance of the Mexican embassy in their defense).

Many of these decisions are highly controversial and, as would be expected, subject to criticism from many quarters. Many decisions cannot be enforced. For instance, in the above examples, Iran did not comply with the ICJ’s judgment, Uganda will probably never pay the ordered $10 billion in reparations, and the United States did not overturn the sentences of the Mexican nationals and, indeed, withdrew from the treaty on which the court’s decision was based.

In the following case, Mr. Nottebohm was seeking diplomatic protection by Liechtenstein, of which he was a naturalized citizen, against the acts of Guatemala, where he resided. Diplomatic protection is the right of one nation to take diplomatic or judicial action to protect the rights of a person to whom it has granted nationality from a violation of international law by another nation. (Case on Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions, Judgment of Aug. 30, 1924 P.C.I.J.)


Nottebohm Case [Liechtenstein v. Guatemala]

Judgment of April 6th, 1955: I.C.J. Reports 4	International Court of Justice


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Friedrich Nottebohm was born in Germany in 1881. He moved to Guatemala for business reasons in 1905 and lived there until 1943, except for business trips and visits to his brother in Liechtenstein. He remained a German citizen during that time. One month after Germany’s invasion of Poland and the start of World War II in 1939, while visiting Liechtenstein, Nottebohm applied to become a naturalized citizen. Liechtenstein waived the three-year residency

requirement. Nottebohm paid taxes and fees to Liechten-stein and filed the requisite forms, and Liechtenstein swore him in as a citizen and issued him a passport. Nottebohm returned to Guatemala in 1940. In 1943, Guatemala entered World War II, siding with the United States. Upon his return to Guatemala, Nottebohm was arrested as a German enemy and turned over to the United States for internment. His property was seized by Guatemala. Nottebohm was released in 1946, but his

continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	43



continued



property was not returned. Liechtenstein filed a “memo-rial” for diplomatic protection of its citizen, as the complaint is called, before the International Court of Justice, claiming that Guatemala had violated interna-tional law by refusing to recognize Liechtenstein as his country of nationality. Liechtenstein claims that it is entitled to damages.

JUDGMENT

…[I]nternational law leaves it to each State to lay down the rules governing the grant of its own nationality. * * * On the other hand, a State cannot claim that the rules it has thus laid down are entitled to recognition by another State unless it has acted in conformity with this general aim of making the legal bond of nationality accord with the individual’s genuine connection with the State …

According to the practice of States, to arbitral and judicial decisions and to the opinions of writers, nationality is a legal bond having as its basis a social fact of attachment, a genuine connection of existence, inter-ests and sentiments, together with the existence of reciprocal rights and duties. It may be said to constitute the juridical expression of the fact that the individual upon whom it is conferred, either directly by the law or as the result of an act of the authorities, is in fact more closely connected with the population of the State conferring nationality than with that of any other State. * * *

Naturalization is not a matter to be taken lightly. To seek and to obtain it is not something that happens frequently in the life of a human being. It involves his breaking of a bond of allegiance and his establishment of a new bond of allegiance. It may have far-reaching con-sequences and involve profound changes in the destiny of the individual who obtains it. It concerns him personally, and to consider it only from the point of view of its repercussions with regard to his property would be to misunderstand its profound significance. In order to appraise its international effect, it is impossible to disregard the circumstances in which it was conferred, the serious character which attaches to it, the real and effective, and not merely the verbal preference of the individual seeking it for the country which grants it to him. * * *

At the time of his naturalization does Nottebohm appear to have been more closely attached by his tradition, his establishment, his interests, his activities, his family ties, his intentions for the near future to Liechtenstein than to any other State? * * *

At the date when he applied for naturalization Nottebohm had been a German national from the time of his birth. He had always retained his connec-

tions with members of his family who had remained in Germany and he had always had business connections with that country. His country had been at war for more than a month, and there is nothing to indicate that the application for naturalization then made by Nottebohm was motivated by any desire to dissociate himself from the Government of his county.

He had been settled in Guatemala for 34 years. He had carried on his activities there. It was the main seat of his interests. He returned there shortly after his naturalization, and it remained the centre of his interests and of his business activities. He stayed there until his removal as a result of war measures in 1943. * * *

In contrast, his actual connections with Liechtenstein were extremely tenuous. No settled abode, no prolonged residence in that country at the time of his application for naturalization: the application indicates that he was paying a visit there and confirms the transient character of this visit by its request that the naturalization proceed-ings should be initiated and concluded without delay. No intention of settling there was shown at that time or realized in the ensuing weeks, months or year-on the contrary, he returned to Guatemala very shortly after his naturalization and showed every intention of remaining there. * * * Furthermore, other members of his family have asserted Nottebohm’s desire to spend his old age in Guatemala.

These facts clearly establish, on the one hand, the absence of any bond of attachment between Notte-bohm and Liechtenstein and, on the other hand, the existence of a long-standing and close connection between him and Guatemala, a link which his naturali-zation in no way weakened. * * * It was granted without regard to the concept of nationality adopted in international relations.

Naturalization was asked for not so much for the purpose of obtaining a legal recognition of Notte-bohm’s membership in fact in the population of Liechtenstein, as it was to enable him to substitute for his status as a national of a belligerent State that of a national of a neutral State, with the sole aim of thus coming within the protection of Liechtenstein but not of becoming wedded to its traditions, its interests, its way of life or of assuming the obligations - other than fiscal obligations - and exercising the rights pertaining to the status thus acquired.

Guatemala is under no obligation to recognize a nationality granted in such circumstances. Liechten-stein consequently is not entitled to extend its protec-tion to Nottebohm vis-à-vis Guatemala and its claim must, for this reason, be held to be inadmissible.

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




continued

Decision.   Guatemala was not required to recognize	Case Questions
the citizenship granted by Liechtenstein in a way that	1.	May individuals bring an action against a nation at
did not follow well-established principles of interna-		the ICJ?
tional law.	2.	On what basis did Liechtenstein file this action?
Comment.   Nottebohm was a naturalized citizen of	3.	Although a nation can determine its own criteria
Liechtenstein and citizenship is a domestic law concept.		for citizenship, must that be recognized by other
He was a citizen for purposes of the laws of Liechten-		nations?
stein when in Liechtenstein. Nationality, however, is an	4.	Do you feel that this judgment interfered with
international law concept, important in the international		Liechtenstein’s sovereignty? Why or why not?
arena, and Guatemala’s recognition of nationality was	5.	Would this case be considered one of international
based on international law.		public or private law?
		


International Criminal Court. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (122 parties as of 2013), is a 2001 treaty that created the International Criminal Court, which sits at The Hague, Netherlands. It is independent, and not a part of the United Nations. The Court hears three types of crimes: genocide, crimes against humanity (attacks against civilians through murder, slavery, forced deportations, torture, rape and sexual violence, disappearances, apartheid and other persecutions on the grounds of religion, race, ethnicity, national origin, political beliefs, or gender), and war crimes. Terrorism and drug trafficking are not within the Court’s jurisdiction. Jurisdiction applies to nationals of a country that has ratified the treaty, even if the nationals were acting in an official (government) capacity. There is no statute of limitations—perpetrators can be appre-hended and tried any time during their lifetimes. The Court does not have exclusive jurisdiction over these crimes, as the right of any nation to prosecute genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes still exits under international customary law and domestic law.

The United States, Russia, China, India, and Iran are among the countries that have not joined the Rome Convention. Many critics believe that the Court impinges on national sovereignty, that it could subject government and military leaders to prosecutions solely on political grounds, and that it lacks fair procedures and appeal mechanisms.

ETHICS, SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY, AND CODES OF CONDUCT
.......................................................................

In international business, the law is a floor above which our ethical conduct should rise. Lawyers can tell us what

the law is, or what conduct is lawful or unlawful. They can do a good job of telling us what a likely fine or prison sentence will be for commission of a crime, and they are fairly good at estimating future damages to injured con-sumers, or anyone else with a legal claim against us. But it would be difficult for anyone to tell us what is ethical, or socially responsible, or right or wrong. Compliance with the laws of all countries in which we work is difficult enough. Rising to a higher ethical standard is even harder. After all, ethics are based on one’s own experience, knowledge, culture, beliefs, and personal value system. And in international business, what is ethical in one culture or in one country might not be ethical in another. However, it is easier to evaluate our own notions of right and wrong, and to conform to a higher international standard, when there is a growing international consen-sus on business ethics and social responsibility expressed in international norms. Norms and standards—the con-science of world public opinion—can be found in codes of conduct drafted by public and private international organizations, and by companies themselves. Although the codes are voluntary and non-binding, they do have the soft enforcement mechanisms that we spoke of earlier in the chapter. They are enforceable because each corpo-rate stakeholder has an interest in them being enforced, as those stakeholders are not just the owners and direc-tors, but also the subcontractors and business partners, customers, employees, managers of large investment funds and other investors, and the public. Indeed, taken together, these codes contain a framework for promoting ethical conduct and social responsibility in international business.

International Business and Human Rights

International human rights law protects individuals and groups from the acts of governments that violate


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	45




their civil, political, or human rights. Sources of human rights law includes customary international law and many international conventions. Today human rights law issues are seen as a broader concept that have ramifications in international business, and especially to large, multinational firms. The Guiding Principles for Business on Human Rights (2011), published by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, addresses this. Although not a legally binding document, it does reflect the thinking about human rights and business: Article 23 states,

In all contexts, business enterprises should

(a)Comply with all applicable laws and respect internationally recognized human rights, wherever they operate

(b)Seek ways to honour the principles of inter-nationally recognized human rights when faced with conflicting requirements

(c)Treat the risk of causing or contributing to gross human rights abuses as a legal compli-ance issue wherever they operate

We started this section with the idea that the law is a floor for our ethical conduct. This is reflected in a quote from the Guiding Principles.

The responsibility to respect human rights is a global standard of expected conduct for all business enterprises wherever they operate. It exists independently of States’ abilities and/or willingness to fulfill their own human rights obligations, and does not diminish those obligations. And it exists over and above compliance with national laws and regulations protecting human rights.

International Labour Organization

The International Labour Organization (ILO), located in Geneva, was founded in 1919 and became a part of the UN system in 1946. The objectives of the ILO are to bring together government, industry, and labor groups, with a focus on developing countries, to help promote the rights of workers, create decent and beneficial employment opportu-nities, eliminate child labor, and help foster ideas and the means for the economic and social protection of the poor, the elderly, the unemploy-able, women, and children. The governing body of the ILO is made up of individual representatives of government, industry, and labor.

Perhaps the most important undertaking of the ILO has been the creation of international labor standards, embodied in 188 conventions and almost



200non-binding “recommendations” for minimum standards of basic workers’ rights. These include the right of workers to freely associate, the right to organize and bargain with employers collectively, abolition of forced labor and child labor, creation of a safe working environment, protection of migrant workers and workers at sea, elimination of discrimi-nation at work, equality of opportunity and treatment for men and women workers, and other standards addressing workplace health and safety. ILO conven-tions are legally binding on a member nation only when ratified by the member nation’s government. Not all countries have ratified all conventions. For example, the United States has ratified only fourteen ILO conventions.

The OECD Codes of Conduct

The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), located in Paris, is an intergov-ernmental organization whose members consist of national governments, with nongovernmental organi-zations joining as observers. The OECD comprises 34 industrialized countries, including the United States, Canada, Mexico, Israel, Japan, Korea, Turkey, and the European countries. Some of the formerly communist countries of Eastern Europe are also members.

The OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises are a set of voluntary recommendations to multi-nationals encouraging responsible business conduct when they operate in host countries. They cover the entire range of business ethics and social responsibility issues. They are not legally enforceable, but are well known and reflect the consensus of many govern-ments. They encourage self-enforcement through accountability, reporting, and internal controls, such as encouraging “whistle blowing” by employees who become aware of corporate violations. The guidelines were first issued in 1976 and revised in 2000. A few representative standards include those for employ-ment, environmental protection, corruption, con-sumer privacy, and diffusion of technology in developing countries. One interesting environmental standard calls on countries to “not use the lack of full scientific certainty as a reason for postponing measures to prevent or minimize serious damage to the environment.”

You can find other OECD recommendations in specific areas in the OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions (1997), Guidelines for Protecting


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




Consumers from Fraudulent and Deceptive Commer-cial Practices Across Borders, and the Guidelines for Consumer Protection in the Context of Electronic Commerce.

United Nations Global Compact

The UN Global Compact is a partnership of international companies, public interest groups, and UN agencies who pledge to support a set of voluntary principles on human rights, labor standards, the environment, and corruption. The ten core principles are presented in very general terms. For instance, one states that, “Businesses should make sure that they are not complicit [with governments] in human rights abuses.” Another states that, “Businesses should support a precautionary approach to environmental challenges.” Of course, the Global Compact is not without criticism from those who are generally critical of all UN activities. However, the core principles are merely a statement of the most basic, universally recognized principles of corporate social responsibility. According to the UN, as of 2012 there were 7,000 corporate signatories from around the world, although reception of the compact has been greatest in Europe (56 percent of signatories), Latin America (18 percent), Asia (14 percent), and North America (5 percent).


CERES Principles

The	Coalition	for	Environmentally	Responsible

Economies, or CERES, is a private, mostly American network of environmental groups, socially conscious investors, and companies committed to following the CERES Principles of environmental and social accountability. One provision of the CERES Principles requires that in selecting a board of directors the company will look for individuals with demonstrated environmental commitment, and the CEO and direc-tors will take responsibility for the firm’s environmental policy.

Corporate Codes of Conduct

In recent years, many companies have had an increased interest in enacting their own codes of conduct. There are surely many reasons for a company doing this. It might be seen as good business, in that it creates goodwill with customers and investors. Some might see it as an opportunity to foster an ethical and responsible attitude in their employees while others may view it as an opportunity for self-regulation that



could forestall the enactment of more restrictive national laws and regulations. In the United States, the guidelines for sentencing corporate offenders allow for reduced fines and sentences if a defendant can show that it has had a code of conduct and compliance program to reduce the likelihood of criminal conduct.

A good example of a corporate ethics code is the Levi Strauss & Co. Global Sourcing and Operating Guidelines. It is generally recognized as the first code of conduct created by a multinational corporation and made applicable to its foreign suppliers. While these guidelines address issues important to an apparel company like Levi Strauss, their basic ideas can be applicable to any firm that does business through a global supply chain or with a supplier or contractor in a developing country in an industry that is highly labor intensive.

The guidelines include the Business Partner Terms of Engagement, representing an effort by Levi Strauss to control the activities of its more than 500 overseas contractors and suppliers. In the 1990s, the company discovered (as did many U.S. apparel and footwear makers) that a large number of its subcontractors were maintaining substandard working conditions or using child labor in some fashion. The company not only reacted quickly to stop these practices, it began developing guidelines to end them. The Business Partner Terms of Engagement sets out, in more than 70 pages, the minimum standards for the fair treatment of workers that must be met by any foreign firm wishing to supply or contract with Levi Strauss. It addresses specifics such as wages, working hours, the use of corporal punishment, and how to treat workers on the factory floor. Levi Strauss provides its suppliers with manuals and training programs to implement its standards. The company also makes public its list of all overseas factories producing Levi Strauss products.

Other apparel companies, with similar codes, include The Gap (Code of Vendor Conduct), The Limited (What We Stand For), Sara Lee (Global Business Standards and Global Standards for Suppli-ers), Wal-Mart (Ethical Standards Program), and many others. It is generally agreed that for any company’s code of conduct to be effective it must be communicated to its employees, become a part of its corporate culture, include disciplinary measures and other methods for ensuring compliance, include a system for measuring its effectiveness, and provide a means of shareholder and public accountability.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	47




COMPARATIVE LAW:

DIFFERENCES IN NATIONAL
LAWS AND LEGAL SYSTEMS
.......................................................................

The study of “comparative law” refers to the study of differences in national laws and legal systems. These differences cover the entire range of law—marriage and family law, business law, liability for wrongful torts, crimes, and more. There are also differences in legal procedures, the role of legislation and case law, the function of judges, the conduct of trials, the use of legal remedies in civil cases, and punishments in criminal cases. These differences are rooted deep in national culture, politics, economics, and especially his-tory, and often are the result of centuries of gradual evolution, combined with rapid change caused by wars, revolution, and political turmoil. Even the opening of world markets for commerce and trade— globalization—has influenced the development of law. There is no better example of how legal systems adapt to change than the case of modern Japan.

Modern Japan: An Example of Legal Change

Japan’s earliest legal records date back to at least 500 A.D., and for most of its history it was a feudal system whose laws were based on early Confucian and Buddhist principles taken from China. Japan had been largely closed to Westerners and Western trade, except for some trade with the Dutch until the mid-nineteenth century. As the Japanese opened their doors to trade, they recognized that a modern legal system, one on an equal footing with those of the Americans and Europeans, was necessary and would enhance their bargaining position in negotiating trade agreements. In response, during the 1860s, the Japanese started a national effort to modernize their legal system. New law schools opened in Japan, and law professors were exchanged with foreign institutions. Japan sent out legal scholars around the world, primarily to Europe, to study foreign legal codes and to find ways to adapt these to Japan. By the end of the nineteenth century, Japan had remade its legal system largely in the image of the European countries, primarily of Germany. The result was the adaptation of European civil law principles to Japanese culture and society. These included written codes in commercial law, real property law, family law, criminal law, and others, as well as procedures for trials and deciding cases.



After World War II the United States became the major influence in Japan, resulting in a parliamentary democracy and bill of rights, while preserving the symbolic role of the Emperor. The United States also revised many of Japan’s business laws. To this day, it is safe to say that Japan’s laws are an amalgamation of European civil criminal law, American constitutional and administrative law, and Japanese cultural values.

We began this section by mentioning some of those forces that influence legal change—war and history, culture, religion, globalization, and international trade. In the case of Japan, we see all of these forces at play.

Modern Legal Systems of the World

While it is obvious that laws can differ from country to country, the differences in legal systems are largely differences in the role of legislatures in enacting statutes or codes, the role of judges and the courts in applying and interpreting the law, and in legal procedures. Here we briefly describe the most widespread modern legal systems found in the world today. These are the common law, civil law, Islamic law, and mixed systems that incorporate characteristics of more than one.

Origins of Civil Law Systems

Civil law includes most of Eastern and Western Europe, Scandinavia, Latin America, Japan, and Russia. Mixed civil law systems include much of Africa (including tribal law). China’s system is largely civil, mixed with principles of socialist economic law and traditional Confucian values.

While the term “civil law” can have several different meanings, the most common meaning to Americans is in reference to the laws affecting private rights and remedies, such as contract law, family or inheritance law, or tort law. However, in this chapter, civil law refers to those modern legal systems that are derived from ancient Roman law.

Early Roman Law and Its Revival. The early Romans had a penchant for writing, or most likely carving, very simple laws into bronze or marble tablets and placing them in public places. These became the earliest written Roman codes. Rome’s conquering armies carried Roman law far and wide. Eventually, Rome had amassed thousands of edicts, rules, and penalties created by generations of emperors. Over the centuries, they had become unwieldy and outdated. By 529 A.D., Rome had long ceased to be the capital of the Roman Empire, and the Emperor Justinian ruled


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




the Eastern Roman Empire from his seat of govern-ment in Byzantium (modern Istanbul). In that year, Justinian presided over the rewriting of Roman law, which was condensed and compiled into one code, known as the Justinian Code. It classified legal rules and organized them into a logical system that created a “body” of law, in a form that could be learned, understood, and applied. However, Rome had already been overrun by Germanic hordes in the West. The Roman Empire had been lost, and in time, Justinian’s code was forgotten—some say lost—almost forever.

Hundreds of years later, around 1100 A.D., copies of Justinian’s long- lost code were discovered. Legal scholars from Italy and around the world began to take great interest. They were impressed by how comprehensive it was and how it had arranged legal principles in an orderly and systematic manner. For centuries, Roman law was taught only as an academic discipline, primarily in Italian universities.

Centuries later, the Emperor Napoleon found the clarity and organization of the Roman system to be very appealing, and in 1804, he used Roman principles as the basis for consolidating all French law into one code. The Napoleonic Code was soon translated into almost every language, and adaptations of it spread throughout Europe and the world. It was the model for the new legal systems of Latin America on their independence. The legal systems in civil law countries still have their distant roots in Roman law.

In the nineteenth century Germany started work on a uniform code, also closely based on the organization of Roman law. In 1900, it enacted its Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, the German civil code, as well as codes of commercial law and criminal law. The Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch is still the codified law of Germany to this day, having been amended through the twentieth century, and most recently in 2002. These two codes have been an important influence on the growth of civil law internationally. The German legal codes influenced the legal systems of Japan, China, Portugal, Brazil, and many other countries. Today, the civil law system is the predominant legal system in the world. Despite common legal heritage, there still are many national differences in the civil law systems. Scotland, South Africa, and the Scandinavian countries have variations of the traditional civil law system.

Origins of Common Law Systems

It amazes many American students to learn that English law originated in the Normandy region of



France via the Norman Conquest of 1066. While many English and American legal terms come from French and Latin (after all, the Romans had conquered Gaul and Britain), the revival of Roman law in the eleventh and twelfth centuries that occurred on the European continent completely skipped Britain, which by then was branching off on its own legal track.

The job of describing one thousand years of English legal history in a few paragraphs is not easy. But it is an interesting tale. Anglo-Saxon law governed much of Britain from the fall of the Roman Empire until the Norman Conquest in 1066. Law came partly from the early kings and their councils and partly from local custom. By 1066, legal disputes were being heard by Anglo-Saxon courts. There were early forms of trial, but there was no evidence or factual proof offered. There were no witnesses as we know them today. Proof at trials was based on the ceremonious recitation of a formal oath by the parties and their “oath helpers.” The higher one’s social status, the fewer helpers he needed. One mistake in the recitation, one slip of the tongue, and the accused was deemed to have lied, and was thus guilty by divine intervention. There was also trial by ordeal—perhaps by placing a hand in fire. Again, by divine intervention, if the hand became infected over time, the accused had lied. If the hand healed, he had told the truth. It was primitive and archaic. Perhaps the most common method of proof was “trial by battle.” Needless to say of course, justice was not kind to some.

Then, after 1066, William the Conqueror introduced a political and economic system commonly called feudalism. All land was parceled out to his closest followers, the lords, who in turn gave parcels to subtenants, who in turn did the same. Each took his land with certain rights and in return for certain duties owed to the tenant above, or to his lord. The duties might be farming, knight service, or castle guard, for example. Even the church received land in return for prayers. The very first laws developed by William were created to enforce feudal rights in land.

While European feudalism no longer exists, the legal system that William and the kings that followed introduced to England does. They decreed that all justice flowed from the king, and from the King’s Court, or Curia Regis (the king’s closest advisors, sitting at Westminster). Justice from the king was obtainable through one of many formal, written writs. Soon traveling judges were sent into the countryside to hold court. Eventually, the king’s judges brought with them a new concept, trial by jury.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	49




As one would expect, the popularity of trial by jury over trial by ordeal or battle led to the eventual demise of the old Anglo-Saxon courts. As these itinerant judges decided cases, they wrote down their decisions and shared them with other judges of the King’s Court. Judges could now justify their decisions by citing the decisions of other judges in similar cases. A “common” body of law resulted. Thus began the common law system that we know today—where the reasoned decisions of judges become the law of the case, a legal precedent that binds judges in deciding similar cases in the future. This is expressed in the common law doctrine of stare decisis, meaning that courts should “let the decision stand” unless it is overruled by a higher authority.

The common law spread with the British Empire. Examples of common law countries today include Australia, Canada, Ghana, Great Britain, the United States, and many Caribbean island nations. India has a mixed system that is largely based on the common law. Even many civil law nations have adopted common law principles.

Differences between Modern Civil Law and Common Law Countries

Civil law and common law systems today have many differences and many similarities. Both systems rely on legislative codes, or statutes, as the primary source of law. However, in civil law countries the legal codes are more comprehensive, establishing general principles that are interpreted by judges and applied to the case before them. Where there are gaps in the code law, the judge will draw from the code’s principles and doctrine to decide a case. The courts in both systems issue judicial decisions. While civil law judges often cite earlier court decisions that they consider representative of settled law, they are not bound to follow them. Civil law judges do not render opinions that make new law in the form of binding precedent, as do common law judges. It can be said that civil law lawyers are more trained in the interpretation of code law, while common law lawyers are more skilled in using case precedent to develop legal arguments for their clients. It is probably true that researching case law is far more difficult in common law systems, where lawyers must find and piece together common legal principles from unrelated cases and justify the application of those principles to their client’s case. Of course, in common law countries, case decisions can always be overridden by statute, as long as the statute does not violate a constitutional doctrine.



The role of judges is also different in civil law countries. The professional judge is schooled for a career as a judge, not a lawyer. In criminal cases, judges take a more inquisitorial role, as do the lawyers for both sides, in an investigative search for the truth. The process is less adversarial than in common law countries. In other legal matters, such as contract or tort cases, judges do the work that both judge and jury would do in common law countries. Unlike common law judges, they can under-take their own investigations of the facts and decide what witnesses to call and what questions to put to them. Much of this is done in writing. In common law countries, the judge is an arbiter between opposing counsel, ruling on what evidence or testimony is admissible, and maintaining a fair trial.

Islamic Law

Over 20 percent of the world’s population is Muslim. They are located in some of the very richest and very poorest countries on earth, in the Middle East, Northern Africa, and Central and Southeast Asia. The largest Muslim populations are in Indonesia, Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Turkey, Iran, and Egypt. In less than 50 years, the Muslim countries of the Middle East have gone from the age of antiquity to the modern age of information, technology, and oil wealth.

The poorer Muslim countries are undergoing tremen-dous social and political change. Some have adopted Western practices in business, society, and to a lesser extent, family life. Others have returned to strict Islamic principles. Some Muslim countries give limited rights to women; others abide by strict fundamentalist principles. For example, in Saudi Arabia unmarried women are the wards of their fathers, and widowed women are the wards of their sons.

All Muslim countries seem caught in the political, social, and religious struggle between the Western nations and Islamic fundamentalism. Because of the importance of the Muslim countries today, business students should have some understanding of their basic laws.

Most Muslim countries today have modern legal systems, based on civil law or common law, mixed with principles of Islamic law. Islamic law is known as Sharia (or Shari’ah), meaning “divine law.” It is derived from the Koran (Qur’an), and from the sunna. The Koran is the main religious book of the Islamic religion that expresses fundamental Islamic values. The sunna is the written record of the teachings and actions of the prophet Muhammad. In addition, Islamic jurists and scholars qualified to interpret the scriptural sources have produced


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




opinions known as fiqh. An understanding of the Sharia requires reference to the fiqh for guidance. Islamic judges do not issue written opinions with the force of law, and they are not bound by the precedents of other courts. They are attempting to seek the truth, the divine word of God.

Saudi Arabian Legal System. An example of a strict Muslim country that is governed by Sharia is Saudi Arabia. It is a monarchy and all laws are decreed by the King, in consultation with his highest ministers, in accordance with Sharia. The basic law sets out very general legal principles. For example, Article 41 states, “Foreign residents in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia shall abide by its regulations and shall show respect for Saudi social traditions, values, and feelings.”

All Saudi citizens must be of the Muslim faith. Serious crimes are punishable by capital punishment, stoning, amputations, or floggings. Rape, theft, the possession or use of alcohol, fornication, and adultery are serious crimes. Drug smuggling can be punishable by death. The Sharia courts hear cases involving crimes, family matters, property, and torts. In the last few years, Saudi Arabia has enacted new business regulations on product labeling, insurance, foreign investment, corporate income tax, trademarks, and others. These are considered to supplement Islamic law and must never conflict with it. Commercial and business disputes are heard by special commissions for grievances appointed by the King.

Pakistani Legal System. Other Muslim countries that had been colonized by Western nations in past




centuries, such as Pakistan, have closer historical ties to Western legal systems. Pakistan’s legal system has been influenced by the British, but is governed in part by Islamic principles. Today, Pakistan has a modern, written constitution, with a bill of rights that has some language that is similar to the American Constitution. It does declare Islam as the state religion.

Pakistan has secular civil and criminal courts, as well as a Federal Shariat Court, which has the power to invalidate any public law if it violates Islamic law. Appeals go to the Supreme Court of Pakistan.

The case of M. Aslam Khaki v. Syed Muhammad Hashim (2000) illustrates the great differences be-tween banking and finance in Western nations and Islamic law nations. The Muslim countries have both international banks and Islamic banks. Islamic banks abide by Sharia law that prohibits the payment of interest on loans and deposits (although they do have alternative forms of compensation that substitute for interest). In its decision, the Supreme Court of Pakistan struck down the use of interest on all loans and bank deposits (including personal loans, commercial and corporate loans, and interest paid by the government on foreign loans). In 2002, the same court reconsidered its opinion, citing errors, and ruled that invalidating the payment of interest to non-Muslims would “pose a high degree of risk to the economic stability and security of Pakistan.” Given that there are now many purely Islamic banks in the Muslim world that follow Islamic law, cases like this one could have a tremendous effect on international business worldwide.


M. Aslam Khaki v. Syed Muhammad Hashim

Shariah Appellate Bench PLD 2000 SC 225 Supreme Court of Pakistan (2000)


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

This case illustrates a classic case of the conflict between Islamic law and modern business. In 1991, the Federal Shariah Court of Pakistan declared the payment of interest (riba) by banks on loans and deposits to be contrary to Islamic law. During the 1990s, Pakistani banks adopted many banking techni-ques to avoid the payment of interest, such as equity investments, profit sharing, and service charges. The government, together with several banks, brought this appeal to the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The court’s entire opinion was 1,100 pages long. Below are excerpts from the individual opinion of Maulana Justice Taqi Usmani, an Islamic scholar trained in strict

Sharia law. As you read, consider the political over-tones of the opinion and the economic analysis of interest that would be considered contrary to Western, capitalist economic theory.

MAULANA JUSTICE TAQI USMANI

40.Imam Abubakr Al-Jassas (D.380 AH) in his famous work Ahkamul Qur’an has explained riba in the following words: “And the riba which was known to and practiced by the Arabs was that they used to advance loan in the form of Dirham (silver coin) or Dinar (gold coin) for a certain term with an agreed increase on the amount of the principal advanced.”

continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	51



continued


138.Firstly, money (of the same denomination) isand backed by real assets. In order to limit the use of

not held to be the subject-matter of trade, like other	loans, the Shar’iah has permitted to borrow money

commodities. Its use has been restricted to its basic	only in cases of dire need, and has discouraged the

purpose, i.e., to act as a medium of exchange and a	practice of incurring debts for living beyond one’s

measure of value.	means or to grow one’s wealth. * * *

139. Secondly, if for exceptional reasons, money	160. Conversely, once the interest is allowed, and

has to be exchanged for money or it is borrowed, the	advancing loans, in itself, becomes a form of profitable

payment on both sides must be equal, so that it is not	trade, the whole economy turns into a debt-oriented

used for the purpose it is not meant for, i.e., trade in	economy  which  not  only  dominates  over  the  real

money itself.	economic activities and disturbs its natural functions

140.Imam Al-Ghazzali (d. 505 A.H.) the renownedby creating frequent shocks, but also puts the whole

jurist  and  philosopher  of  the  Islamic  history  has	mankind under the slavery of debt.

discussed the nature of money in an early period when	* * *

the Western theories of money were non-existent. He	164. Since in an interest-based system funds are

says: “…  And whoever effects the transactions  of	provided on the basis of strong collateral and the end-

interest on money is, in fact, discarding the blessing of	use of the funds does not constitute the main criterion

Allah and is committing injustice, because money is	for financing, it encourages people to live beyond their

created for some other things, not for itself.” * * *	means. The rich people do not borrow for productive

151.This is exactly what Imam Al-Ghazzali hadprojects only, but also for conspicuous consumption.

pointed out nine hundred years ago. The evil results of	Similarly, governments borrow money not only for
such an unnatural trade have been further explained by	genuine  development  programs,  but  also  for  their
him at another place, in the following words: “Riba is	lavish expenditure and for projects motivated by their
prohibited because it prevents people from undertak-	political ambitions rather than being based on sound
ing real economic activities. This is because when a	economic assessment.
person having money is allowed to earn more money		204. The basic and foremost characteristic of Islamic
on the basis of interest, either in spot or in deferred	financing is that, instead of a fixed rate of interest, it is
transactions, it becomes easy for him to earn without	based on profit and loss sharing. We have already
bothering  himself  to  take  pains  in  real  economic	discussed the horrible results produced by the debt-
activities. This leads to hampering the real interests of	based economy. Realizing the evils brought by this
the humanity, because the interests of the humanity	system, many economists, even of the Western world
cannot be safeguarded without real trade skills, indus-	are  now  advocating  in  favor  of  an  equity-based
try and construction.”	financial arrangement.
153. Another major difference between the secular	Decision.	Interest on the use of money is unjustified
capitalist system and the Islamic principles is that		
	and unearned income. A financial system based on the
under the former system, loans are purely commercial	
	lending of money for interest is unjust and contrary to
transactions meant to yield a fixed income to the	
	Islamic law. Equity investments are lawful where all par-
lenders. Islam, on the other hand, does not recognize	
	ties share the risk of profit and loss.
loans  as  income-generating  transactions.  They  are	
	Comment.	The Islamic banking community in many
meant only for those lenders who do not intend to		
	countries has been innovative in developing lending
earn a worldly return through them. They, instead, lend	
	and banking programs that they feel are both in keeping
their money either on humanitarian grounds to achieve	
	with Islamic principles and adaptive to modern banking.
a reward in the Hereafter, or merely to save their	
			
money through a safer hand. So far as investment is	Case Questions
concerned, there are several other modes of invest-	
			
ment like partnership … which may be used for that	1.  What is riba? Why is riba not permitted pursuant to
purpose. The transactions of loan are not meant for		the Sharia law?
earning income.	2.	What	would  the  effect  be  on  Pakistan  if  the
159. Once the interest is banned, the role of “loans”		decision were implemented in Islamic banks?
in commercial activities becomes very limited, and the	3.	In what other ways have culture and religion
whole financing structure turns out to be equity-based		influenced modern legal systems?







Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




CONCLUSION
.......................................................................

Although international law is rooted in centuries of customary law and treaties, it affects modern interna-tional relations and international business every day. It affects the movement of people, goods, and money across national borders. Virtually every area of interna-tional trade, foreign investment, and intellectual prop-erty rights is governed by at least one international convention. International law offers solutions to some of humankind’s greatest challenges: human rights abuses by rogue governments, pollution that knows no national boundaries, transnational crimes, interna-tional terrorism, and more. However, international




solutions depend on the willingness of nations to coop-erate, and that is not always politically possible. One can only hope that humankind is up to that challenge.

As we said at the beginning of the chapter, our discussion of international law was guided by our broader interest in understanding the legal environ-ment of international business. For that reason, our approach and coverage is somewhat different from that applied in traditional courses in international law.

Finally, there are several topics traditional to the study of international law that must wait for the next chapter on the resolution of international commercial disputes.




Chapter Summary


1.International law includes public and private international law. Public international law gov-erns the conduct of nations with other nations or the conduct of nations in their relationships with individuals. Private international law governs the rights and responsibilities of private individuals or corporations operating in an international envi-ronment, such as international sales contracts or shipping. International law relies primarily on “soft” enforcement mechanisms: the force of public opinion, trade and diplomatic sanctions, and the withholding of foreign aid. The ultimate sanction is war.

2.Customary international law is derived primarily from the widespread and long-standing practices of nations. International law also arises from agreement. A treaty is a legally binding agreement between two or more nations that is recognized and given effect under international law. A convention is a multilateral treaty on a topic of broad international concern.

3.International business law is any law or regula-tion, whether derived from national or interna-tional sources, that governs cross-border business transactions, the activities of those doing business in foreign countries or subject to the jurisdiction of foreign courts, or the resolution of interna-tional business disputes.

4.Uniformity and predictability in international business law are important to companies that do international business.

5.Transnational business crimes are major pro-blems calling for global solutions. Typical crimes include bribery and corruption, tax evasion, customs fraud, criminal violations of export control laws, financial crimes, and criminal violations of environmental laws, securities laws, and antitrust laws.

6.Jurisdiction means the power of a nation to create laws that proscribe conduct and to act over individuals, corporations, or their property in the application or enforcement of those laws. When used in reference to a court, it is the power of a court to act or to hear a case—to adjudicate. There are five doctrines of international criminal jurisdiction: territoriality, nationality, the protective principle, passive personality, and universality.

7.Extraterritoriality refers to a nation’s jurisdiction that extends beyond its territorial borders.
8.The International Court of Justice hears cases brought by nations against other nations. Individuals and private corporations are not parties to cases before the court. The court has jurisdiction over all cases brought by nations under the UN Charter or involving treaties, conventions, international obligations, or ques-tions of international law. Jurisdiction is not compulsory; each nation must agree to submit to the court’s jurisdiction.

9.Business ethics and social responsibility are important to the stakeholders of all companies. But these can be vague concepts for firms


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	53




operating in different parts of the world. One solution, in addition to legal penalties, are voluntary codes of conduct produced by interna-tional organizations and corporations. While some people can argue their effectiveness, they do provide a common framework for manage-ment, and they do focus the spotlight of world public opinion on the problem and its solutions.




10.Comparative law refers to the study of differences in national laws and legal systems. These differences cover the entire range of law—marriage and family law, business law, torts, crimes, and more. There are also differences in legal procedures, the role of legislation and case law, the function of judges, the conduct of trials, the use of legal remedies, and punishments in criminal cases.



Key Terms

the law of nations 29	reservation 31	nationality jurisdiction 39
Roman law 29	abrogation 31	protective jurisdiction 39
international law 29	FCN treaties 31	passive personality 39
public international law 30	self-executing treaty 31	universality 40
private international law 30	non-self-executing treaty 31	compulsory jurisdiction 42
treaty 30	direct effect 31	diplomatic protection 42
bilateral treaty 30	customary international law 33	code of conduct 46
multilateral treaty 30	international “norms” 33	CERES Principles 46
convention 30	international business law (IBL) 36	civil law 47
protocol 31	law merchant 36	Justinian Code 48
signatories 31	jurisdiction 37	Napoleonic Code 48
ratification 31	extraterritorial jurisdiction 38	common law system 49
contracting parties 31	territorial jurisdiction 39	Sharia or Shari’ah law 49






Questions and Case Problems

1.Kiobel and other environmental activists were arrested, tortured, and executed by the Nigerian military in 1995. They had been protesting Shell’s oil exploration in the Ogoni region of Nigeria. A lawsuit was brought by Kobel’s widow and others under the Alien Tort Statute (ATS) in the United States against three Royal Dutch Shell companies alleging that the companies had aided and abetted the Nigerian military in committing human rights abuses in violation of customary international law. The defendant corporations are incorporated or headquartered in the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and Nigeria. None of the plaintiffs or defendants are citizens of, or incorporated in, the United States. May an individual may bring an action under the ATS against a corporation for violations of customary international law? If not, do you think that international law should permit damage suits against individuals but leave corporations free to violate the law without conse-quences? Should a corporation be able to shield its







profits from human rights abuses by simply doing business as a corporate entity? Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., 621 F.3d 111 (2nd.Cir. 2010), cert.granted, 132 S.Ct. 472.
2.The defendants conspired to transport 191 Ecuadorian nationals into the United States illegally aboard a 54-foot fishing vessel. A U.S. Navy helicopter sighted the over-crowded vessel off the Guatemalan coast and saw that it had no lights and flew no flag. A Coast Guard detachment found the passengers with little food or water, and the defendants had left the vessel. The defendants were indicted in the United States for conspiracy to induce aliens to illegally enter the United States, and attempting to bring unauthorized aliens to the United States. (8 U.S.C. § 1324). The statute does not mention jurisdiction. The defendants argued that the statute did not apply extraterritorially. Does it? Why or why not? Do you think the “Bowman Exception” applies in this case as described in U.S. v. Campbell, earlier in the chapter? Why or why not? The terrorist attacks of


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




September 11, 2001 were planned overseas. Where are immigration offenses planned? How is that relevant to your legal analysis? Explain. U.S. v. Delgado-Garcia, 374 F.3d 1337 (D.C.Cir. 2004).

3.Assume that someone in a foreign country poisons a shipment of pharmaceuticals destined for the United States, resulting in death of an American consumer in violation of 18 U.S.C.1365 (tampering with a consumer product). Under what circumstances could they be prosecuted in the United States? Would any principle of international law justify bringing them to trial in the United States? Could you argue that the decision in U.S. v. Campbell (see chapter) would apply to this situation?

4.What types of issues lend themselves to international solutions through international law?
5.You overhear someone say, “International law does not exist.” What do they mean? What evidence can you provide to persuade them that they are mistaken?
6.Internationalists often refer to the “unification” or “harmo-nization” of international law. What do you think these terms mean? What factors have influenced the harmoniza-tion of international business law? In what ways do you think IBL is more “national” than international?

7.Do you think corporate codes of conduct can have an effect on making firms more socially responsible? Are




they a substitute for government regulation or do they complement it? Explain.

8.What ideas do you have for setting up an accountabil-ity system to ensure compliance with codes of conduct and other ethical and social responsibility standards for business?
9.Why must corporations be concerned about human rights issues when doing business internationally? Who are the “stakeholders” of a public corporation, and what is management’s responsibility to them?

10.What are the different forms of criminality that are of concern to international businesses? Explain why interna-tional solutions are important. Give some examples.

11.Describe the five theories of international criminal jurisdiction. How have these been made applicable to international terrorism? What types of crimes are covered under the principle of universality? From an international law perspective, do you think that terrorism should be a universal crime? Why or why not?

12.Students often confuse the International Court of Justice with the International Criminal Court. What is the difference between them? Although not covered in this chapter, what is the European Court of Justice and what is its jurisdiction?



Managerial Implications

1.You are a vice president of a multinational corporation headquartered in North America. You are asked to visit Latin America to meet with government officials to consider a location for a new factory. On your arrival, you are met at the airport by one of your hosts, who spends some time that day taking you on a tour of the city and getting acquainted. That evening you are invited to his home for dinner with government representatives. After dinner, one of the guests who works for a key government ministry asks what you think of your company’s role in his country as an employer, taxpayer, and corporate good citizen. He makes it clear that his country is no longer a “puppet” of the North Americans. He asks you to show him that you understand his concerns and to show him that your company will be respectful of his country’s culture, environment, natural resources, and local laws. How do you respond?

2.Assume that a Korean company manufacturing critical tail assemblies for commercial aircraft ships several defective assemblies to manufacturers in the United States. The CEO, a Korean national, was not only aware of the defects at the time the assemblies were being made but was also responsible





for knowingly using inferior parts. He even threatened an engineer with termination if he leaked the truth. One of the assemblies failed on the American-made plane, leading to the crash of a Canadian-flag passenger airline on takeoff from New York. When the investigation leads to him, he flees Korea for Saudi Arabia, where he lives for several years in luxury. Which countries have jurisdiction to prosecute the Korean citizen, and under what legal principles? You do not need to research any international treaties, but you should base your analysis on general principles from this chapter.
3.Your company owns and operates a factory in a foreign country when it is invaded by a neighboring army over a border dispute. The invading government claims that your factory is actually on land belonging to them. Their soldiers destroy your buildings, threaten your employees, and arrest your local manager. While a complete answer to resolving this question will have to wait until later in the book, what recourse do you think you might have under international law against the invading country, if any? How might you proceed? Do you think it would be of any help to contact the U.S. State Department? Why?


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 2: International Law and the World’s Legal Systems	55







Ethical Considerations

We have considered many subjects in this chapter that raise ethical issues—human rights law, international criminal law, international labor standards, bribery and corruption, and others. Here are two cases to consider as food for thought.

Exports of “Unsafe” Pharmaceuticals

Some years ago, it was reported in the world’s press that American pharmaceutical companies were selling in developing countries expired medicines that were no longer permitted to be sold in the United States. Assess the validity of the following arguments:

“There are two sides to every debate. We are talking about antibiotics that are lifesaving and in short supply in some developing countries. True, they are expired under federal regulations in the United States, but they will still be effective for some time to come. It is not illegal overseas, and maybe not illegal to export them, so why should I do anything more than just obey the law? After all, we are selling them at reduced prices to the governments of developing countries. They probably have foreign aid money to buy these with. They will sell them, or give them away, to poor people that otherwise would not be able to afford any medicine at all. Why should I destroy them? After all, we are not talking about AIDS, are we? I wonder what the world and big pharmaceutical companies are doing about that problem?”

Bribery as a “Cost of Doing Business”

What are the economic, political, and social arguments for and against criminalizing the bribery of foreign government








officials in developing countries by employees and repre-sentatives of Western companies? Assess the validity of each of the following arguments in this statement:

“I’ve always thought that bribery is endemic in the developing countries, so ‘When in Rome, do as the Romans do.’ It’s legal there, isn’t it? Nothing would happen to me if I get caught there, would it? My government does not have the right to say whether what I do in a foreign country is a crime. They can’t tell me what is legal or illegal over there. And I don’t have a moral problem, either. I see it as a small price to pay—my company just considers this another ‘cost of doing business.’ We might even try to deduct it on our corporate income tax returns. If I don’t offer cash payments or gifts to my customers in government offices overseas, then my competitors from other countries will. Foreign customers will just buy from my competitors. If I don’t pay, I’d just be giving my competitors a ‘corruption advantage.’ And what difference does this make anyway? Why should my country care? I’ve heard about companies that gave cash payments to the Shah of Iran when he was in power in the 1970s, to his government ministers, even to members of his family. They got contracts worth tens and hundreds of millions of dollars to install everything—telecommunications systems, power plants, and refineries, and, most of all, armaments and weapons. I heard he was a brutal dictator, but so what? That’s not my problem. I don’t see what the problem is.”


























Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C H A P T E R 3
Resolving International Commercial Disputes



AVOIDING BUSINESS DISPUTES
.......................................................................

Long-term business relationships are generally the most profitable ones. Experienced executives and inter-national managers know this, and they work very hard to foster them, at both the personal and organizational levels. Long-term relationships are based on trust. In a world where we do business with people who look, speak, and act differently from ourselves and who live and work oceans away, trust takes on a new and even more important significance. Indeed, it has been said that all of international business is based on trust. Any dispute that threatens the bonds of trust can threaten future business opportunities, do irreparable harm to individual and corporate reputations, and permanently damage long-term relationships. Moreover, when dis-putes become combative, it can be costly, time consum-ing, and physically and mentally exhausting for all parties. After all, there is the real possibility that one or both of the parties will have to litigate in a pro-tracted and expensive trial in a foreign court, before a foreign judge, and in a foreign language, and have their rights determined under foreign procedural rules and possibly foreign law. Quite often the parties must retain attorneys in more than one country. So, when disagree-ments break out, amicable settlements are usually the best outcome and offer the best hope of salvaging a business relationship. It is always helpful if the parties have a reservoir of trust and goodwill that they can draw on to settle the dispute in a friendly way. But, of course, this is not always possible, and the prudent international businessperson, in any contract or any venture, will seek good legal advice and always “hope for the best and plan for the worst.”

Nowhere is this more important than in negotiat-ing and drafting business contracts. The contract is the basis of any bargain and its importance cannot be overstated. If and when a dispute arises, the terms of the contract provide the basis for dispute resolution.

56


Cultural Attitudes toward Disputes

Keep in mind that cultural factors will influence a party’s attitude toward how disputes are settled. Americans are notorious litigators, quickly turning to the courts to redress grievances. Their combative stance can result in a “win or lose” mentality. On the other hand, Asians are notable for going to great lengths to seek an amicable settlement. After all, by tradition, it is a virtue to seek harmony and a vice to seek discord. These differences are evident in the way American and Japanese businesspeople approach contract or business negotia-tions. It is quite common for Americans to include their attorney or corporate counsel as a member of the negotiating team. Indeed, many Western managers and executives would never dream of it being any other way. But to the Japanese, this may seem a little confronta-tional, a little unnecessary, and a bad omen or a sign that disagreement is inevitable.

All too often, Americans view the negotiating process as something to be gotten out of the way so the deal can be closed, the contract signed, and all can go back home. People of many other cultures, from Asia to Latin America, might see the negotiating process as a time to build a relationship and new friendships. Of course, these attitudes differ through-out the world, and from country to country, and no generalizations should be made. But one thing is certain, and that is that the rest of the world views Americans as confrontational and quick to call in the lawyers. Perhaps the words of the English Lord Denning best sum up the foreign view:

As the moth drawn to the light, so is a litigant drawn to the United States. If he can only get his case into their courts, he stands to win a fortune. At no cost to himself; and at no risk of having to pay anything to the other side … The lawyers will charge the litigant nothing for their services but instead they will take forty percent of the damages … If they lose, the litigant will have nothing to pay to the other side. The courts in the United States have no such cost deterrents as we have. There is also in the United States a


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	57




right to trial by jury. These are prone to award fabulous damages. They are notoriously sympathetic and know that the lawyers will take their forty percent before the plaintiff gets anything. All this means that the defendant can be readily forced into a settlement. Smith Kline and French Laboratories v. Bloch, [1983] 1 W.L.R. 730, 733-4 (Eng. C.A.).

The resolution of disputes between citizens of different countries, with business transactions that span continents and cultures, raises many complicated legal and tactical problems. Consider a dispute involving an American manufacturer that purchases thousands of meters of cloth from a Chinese supplier. The cloth is shipped to Vietnam where the manufac-turer contracted to have it embroidered and sewn into pillow shams. When the finished goods arrive in the United States, it is discovered that they are damaged. Apparently the fabric was shipped from China in a defective condition, but the Vietnamese firm failed to inspect for damage as it normally did. The Chinese company claims that the time for bringing the defective fabric to its attention has long passed. The Vietnamese company says it was not its responsibility. Consider all the questions presented. To whom does the manufacturer look for remuneration? Is the relationship between the parties worth keeping, and is the case capable of being settled or should the manufacturer “take the gloves off ?” Was there a contract with either party and did it specify the method of resolution, such as mediation, arbitration, or litigation, and, if so, where and under what law? If the contract does not specify, what legal rules apply to determine where the case should be heard and what law should govern? Finally, if a judgment is obtained through litigation, how will it be enforced across international borders? These are some of the questions we will discuss in this chapter.

Methods of Resolution

This chapter presents several alternatives for dispute resolution, including mediation, arbitration, and litigation. Consider a domestic dispute in which a New York supplier tries to sue a Texas distributor. This situation raises several questions: Should the parties settle, mediate, arbitrate, or litigate? Where should the dispute be heard—in New York or Texas? In federal or state court? Which law applies to the transaction—the law of New York, Texas, or some other jurisdiction? Finally, if a resolution is reached



(be it a settlement, a verdict, or a judgment), how will it be enforced?
Changing the parties to an American supplier and a foreign distributor adds several dimensions to the problem. Many of the same questions that are relevant to a domestic dispute are equally relevant to an international dispute, but they become infinitely more complex. This chapter examines these questions as they apply to commercial disputes in international business.


ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
.......................................................................

Alternative dispute resolution (ADR) usually offers a faster, cheaper, and more efficient alternative to resolv-ing international commercial disputes than litigation. Unlike litigation, ADR requires that the parties volun-tarily submit to the resolution process.

Mediation

Mediation is a voluntary, nonbinding, conciliation process. The parties agree on an impartial mediator who helps them reach a solution amicably. The final decision to settle rests with the parties themselves. It is private, and there are no public court records or glaring articles in the local press to influence local opinion about the firms. The parties reserve all legal rights to resort to binding arbitration or litigation.

Arbitration

Arbitration is a more formalized process resulting in a binding award that the courts of law in many countries will enforce. The parties must agree to arbitration, and once they do, they may not withdraw. Arbitration is frequently used in international busi-ness because it “levels the playing field” since the case may be heard in a more impartial tribunal. First, arbitration may permit the resolution of the case in a third “neutral” country, rather than in the country of one of the parties. The parties are generally free to choose a location for arbitration that is mutually convenient. For example, a dispute between an American company and a Russian company might be arbitrated in Paris or Stockholm. Disputes between American companies and Chinese companies are often arbitrated in Hong Kong. (Not only is Hong


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business






Exhibit 3.1







© Cengage Learning

Some Arbitration Treaties in Force Worldwide Arab Convention on Commercial Arbitration (1987)

Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York Convention, 1959)

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States (Washington Convention, 1966)

European Convention Providing a Uniform Law on Arbitra-tion (Strasbourg Convention, 1966)

Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses (1923)

Geneva Convention on the Execution of Foreign Arbitral Awards (1927)

Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration (Organization of American States, Panama Convention, 1975)



Kong still considered a neutral site, but its awards are enforceable by the courts of both the United States and China.) Secondly, the arbitrator may be chosen by the parties from a roster of impartial industry experts or distinguished lawyers, who may also be from a third country. Finally, the case may be resolved using the impartial and straightforward rules of the arbitrating organization, rather than the procedures buried in the statutes or rules of a court of the country of one of the parties. Arbitration rules are the rules of arbitral tribunals that address issues such as the qualification and appointment of arbitrators, the conduct of proceedings, procedures for finding the facts and applying the law, and the making of awards. These rules are often published in multiple languages.

There are other advantages to arbitration besides neutrality. Pretrial discovery is faster and more limited than that available in the United States, resulting in less expense and delay. The process is private and records of proceedings are not publicly available as are court records. Arbitration and attorney fees are far less than similar fees in a court of law. The rules for evidence admissibility are more flexible than in many national courts. And finally, a party’s right to appeal is more limited.

Although parties can always agree to arbitration, a requirement to submit to arbitration is often set out in many international contracts. Contracts for the sale of goods, commodities, or raw materials might include arbitration clauses. International shipping contracts, employment contracts, international construction contracts, financing agreements, and cruise ship tickets, to name a few, as well as in multimillion- or billion-dollar contracts may also use them Today, arbitration helps to resolve disputes over intellectual property and licensing agreements.

Despite its reputation for being less costly than litigation, arbitration is not cheap. The International


Chamber of Commerce (ICC) estimates that for a $1 million claim before its International Court of Arbitration in Paris, the average arbitrator’s fee is $39,378, plus $21,715 in administrative expenses, for a total of $61,094 in costs—or about 6 percent. For a $100,000 claim, the average arbitrator’s fee is $10,060, plus $5,365 in administrative expenses, for a total of $15,424 in costs—or about 15 percent.

There are other disadvantages to arbitration in addition to cost:

•The losing party in an arbitration has a limited right to appeal the decision, which is usually reserved for rare cases involving misconduct or fraud by the arbitrator or the arbitrator exceeding his or her authority or refusing to consider material evidence.
•Discovery is limited in arbitration proceedings, and parties may proceed to an arbitration hearing without full awareness of the other side’s case or all of the facts.

•Relaxed procedural rules may permit the admission of evidence that would otherwise be excluded from considera-tion in a court of law.
•As previously mentioned, the widespread use of arbitration clauses in contracts may result in the limitation of the right to initiate litigation for an unwary party who has not carefully read the agreement.

•Less sophisticated parties may also be at a disadvantage in such circumstances due to limited experience in the selection of an arbitrator.
•Finally, there is no precedential value to an arbitrator’s decision meaning that it cannot be relied upon in future proceedings to the same extent as judicial opinions.

National Arbitral Laws. Most commercial nations today have laws permitting arbitration and specifying the effect of an arbitral award (see Exhibit 3.1). The British Arbitration Act went into effect in 1996. The Arbitration Law of the People’s Republic of China,


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	59




which became effective in 1994, provides that arbitrators must have eight years’ prior legal experi-ence. The Russian arbitration law, which was enacted in 1993, provides that arbitration may be conducted in Russia in any language agreed upon by the parties. The laws of many countries, such as China, Russia, Mexico, and Canada, were patterned after the 1985 Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of the United Nations’ Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). The U.S. Federal Arbitra-tion Act dates back to 1925, but it has been modernized; it applies to both domestic and interna-tional arbitration and defers to the specific proce-dural rules of the arbitral body conducting the arbitration proceedings. Many U.S. states (e.g., California, Connecticut, Illinois, Oregon, and Texas) have enacted statutes on international commercial arbitration, some patterned after the UNCITRAL model.


Arbitration Bodies. Many organizations worldwide provide arbitral services. The choice is up to the parties, and this is often decided in advance and set out in the terms of the contract. Some leading private organizations for arbitration of commercial disputes include:

•American Arbitration Association

•Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

•Cairo Regional Center for International Commercial Arbitration

•China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission
•Dubai International Arbitration Center

•Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre

•International Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
•Japan Commercial Arbitration Association

•London Court of Arbitration

•St. Petersburg International Commercial Arbitration Court

•Singapore International Arbitration Centre

•World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Arbitration and Mediation Center

Two additional organizations provide dispute resolution between private parties and national governments:

•The International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), a part of the World Bank group, provides arbitration for the settlement of disputes between member countries and investors who qualify as nationals of other member countries.



•The Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague provides arbitral services for commercial disputes to states, private parties, and intergovernmental organizations, including handling mass claims and environmental disputes where one of the parties is a national government.

Each of these organizations operates under a different set of procedural rules. The ICC uses its own, highly respected rules. Many other arbitral bodies use the widely accepted rules drafted by UNCITRAL, which take into account the various legal systems and countries in which they might be used. The Hong Kong Arbitration Center, WIPO, and other organizations throughout the world, for exam-ple, use the UNCITRAL rules.

Arbitration Clauses. Many contracts contain clauses requiring that disputes be submitted for arbitration because doing so removes much of the uncertainty in the event of a breach of contract or other dispute. Here is a typical example:

All disputes or claims arising out of this contract, or breach thereof, shall be resolved by arbitration before [name of arbitral body], and according to the rules of that body. Any award rendered thereby may be entered in any court of competent jurisdiction.

While the validity of these clauses is now generally accepted, that was not always clear. In the following case, Scherk v. Alberto-Culver, the U.S. Supreme Court considered an arbitration clause in an international contract calling for arbitration in Paris.

Enforcement of Arbitration Awards. The courts of most nations recognize and enforce arbitral awards. In the United States, for example, an arbitral award will usually be enforced if the following conditions are met:

•The award is enforceable under the local law of the country where the award was made.
•The defendant was properly subject to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal.

•The defendant was given notice of the arbitration proceeding and an opportunity to be heard.
•Enforcement of the award is not contrary to public policy.
•The subject matter of the contract at issue is not unlawful under applicable law.

•The contract at issue is not void for reasons of fraud or the incapacity of one of the parties.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business






Scherk v. Alberto-Culver

417 U.S. 506 (1974)	United States Supreme Court


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Alberto-Culver Co., a Delaware corporation with its principal office in Illinois, manufactured toiletries and hair products in the United States and abroad. In February 1969, Alberto-Culver signed a contract in Austria to purchase three businesses of Fritz Scherk (a German citizen) that were organized under German and Liechtenstein law, as well as the trademarks to related cosmetics. In the contract, Scherk warranted that he had the sole and unencumbered ownership of these trademarks. The contract also contained a clause that provided that “any controversy or claim [that] shall a rise out of this agreement or the breach thereof would be referred to arbitration before the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris, France, and that the laws of Illinois shall govern.” One year after the closing, Alberto-Culver discovered that others had claims to Scherk’s trademarks. Alberto-Culver tried to rescind the contract; Scherk refused, and Alberto-Culver filed suit in federal court in Illinois claiming that the misrepresentations violated the Securities and Exchange Act, Sec. 10(b), and SEC rule 10b-5. Scherk moved to dismiss or to stay the action pending arbitration. In the U.S. District Court, the motion to dismiss was denied and arbitration was enjoined. The U.S. Court of Appeals affirmed. The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari.


JUSTICE STEWART

The United States Arbitration Act, now 9 U.S.C. 1 et seq., reversing centuries of judicial hostility to arbitra-tion agreements, was designed to allow parties to avoid “the costliness and delays of litigation,” and to place arbitration agreements “upon the same footing as other contracts … “

Alberto-Culver’s contract to purchase the business entities belonging to Scherk was a truly international agreement. Alberto-Culver is an American corporation with its principal place of business and the vast bulk of its activity in this country, while Scherk is a citizen of Germany whose companies were organized under the laws of Germany and Liechtenstein. The negotiations leading to the signing of the contract in Austria and to the closing in Switzerland took place in the United States, England, and Germany, and involved consulta-tions with legal and trademark experts from each of those countries and from Liechtenstein. Finally, and most significantly, the subject matter of the contract

concerned the sale of business enterprises organized under the laws of and primarily situated in European countries, whose activities were largely, if not entirely, directed to European markets.

Such a contract involves considerations and policies significantly different from those found controlling in Wilko v. Swan [citation omitted]. In Wilko, quite apart from the arbitration provision, there was no question but that the laws of the United States generally, and the federal securities laws in particular, would govern disputes arising out of the stock-purchase agreement. The parties, the negotiations, and the subject matter of the contract were all situated in this country, and no credible claim could have been entertained that any international conflict-of-laws problems would arise. In this case, by contrast, in the absence of the arbitration provision considerable uncertainty existed at the time of the agreement, and still exists, concerning the law applicable to the resolutions of disputes arising out of the contract.

Such uncertainty will almost inevitably exist with respect to any contract touching two or more countries, each with its own substantive laws and conflict-of-laws rules. A contractual provision specifying in advance the forum in which disputes shall be litigated and the law to be applied is, therefore, an almost indispensable precondition to achievement of the orderliness and predictability essential to any international business transaction. Furthermore, such a provision obviates the danger that a dispute under the agreement might be submitted to a forum hostile to the interests of one of the parties or unfamiliar with the problem involved.

A parochial refusal by the courts of one country to enforce an international arbitration agreement would not only frustrate these purposes, but would invite unseemly and mutually destructive jockeying by the parties to secure tactical litigation advantages. In the present case, for example, it is not inconceivable that if Scherk had anticipated that Alberto-Culver would be able in this country to enjoin resort to arbitration he might have sought an order in France or some other country enjoining Alberto-Culver from proceeding with its litigation in the United States. Whatever recognition the courts of this country might ultimately have granted to the order of the foreign court, the dicey atmosphere of such a legal no-man’s-land would surely damage the fabric of international commerce and trade, and imperil the willingness and ability of businessmen to enter into international commercial agreements …

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	61



continued



For all these reasons we hold that the agreement of the parties in this case to arbitrate any dispute arising out of their international commercial transac-tion is to be respected and enforced by the federal courts in accord with the explicit provisions of the Arbitration Act.

Decision.	Reversed and remanded.

Comment. The Court understood that an arbitration agreement was the ultimate type of forum selection clause. The Court made reference to national legislation that indicated an acceptance of arbitration (the Arbitra-tion Act, 9 U.S.C 1 et. seq.). Other countries have similar

national legislation or are signatories to the New York Convention and/or the European Convention on Interna-tional Arbitration.

Case Questions

1.What were the Court’s reasons for upholding the arbitration provision?

2.What needs of international businesses were served by the Court’s holding? How were these needs addressed?

3.What factors would Alberto-Culver need to have shown in order to have overturned the arbitration provision?




More than 140 nations have signed the 1958 United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforce-ment of Foreign Arbitral Awards, known as the New York Convention, further strengthening the ability to enforce awards in those countries. The New York Convention requires that an arbitral award made in one country be honored and enforced by the courts of another country, where both countries are parties to the convention. The award will be enforced unless one of the defenses listed above exists or if the original award has been set aside or suspended by a court in the country in which it was made.

LITIGATION
.......................................................................

Litigation in a court of law is the final alternative for resolving a dispute. It is used more frequently in the United States than in virtually any other country. Many countries have different procedural rules for liti-gating cases. First, many concepts familiar to American and English students, such as trial by jury and other traditions, may not be used in the civil law countries. While we take jury trials in criminal and civil cases almost for granted in the United States, the same is not true throughout the world. The role of the judge may be very different; in some countries, the judge is an impartial arbiter of fairness and procedure, while in other countries, he or she may examine witnesses and take an active role in the search for the truth. The dis-covery process, by which the parties attempt to uncover evidence in advance of trial, can also be different. For instance, oral depositions taken under oath outside of court may be routine in the United States, while China



and some other countries prohibit their use. There are different rules for compensating lawyers; in the United States, for instance, contingent fees are widely used in tort cases, while in other countries, they are barred. The entire issue of damages is frequently handled differ-ently. Finally, many countries handle appeals differ-ently, with some, like the United States, limiting appeals to reconsidering issues of law applied by the trial courts. In other countries, appellate courts will consider new or additional evidence.

There can also be many differences in substantive law (“the law of the case”), although this topic is too broad for this chapter. Suffice it to say that almost every body of law—contracts, torts, crimes, property, business regulation, intellectual property, and so forth—can vary from legal system to legal system and country to country. This has a tremendous impact on the outcome of litigation. Certainly, parties to a contract can have some control over the choice of substantive law and procedural rules by incorporating a choice of law clause in the contracts. They may also have control over where the litigation takes place by using a forum selection clause in the contract. Keep these critical issues in mind as you read on.

Jurisdiction

Jurisdiction, one of the key concepts of jurisprudence, is the power of a court to hear and decide a case. A court that has jurisdiction is said to be a “competent” court. The term has different meanings depending on how it is used. For example, territorial jurisdiction refers to the power of criminal courts to hear cases involving crimes committed within their territory.



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




In rem jurisdiction refers to a court’s power over property within its geographical boundaries. Subject matter jurisdiction refers to the court’s authority to hear a certain type of legal matter, such as tort cases or breach of contract. In the United States, for example, federal courts have subject matter jurisdiction over cases involving federal statutes and federal govern-ment agencies, constitutional issues, and cases arising between citizens of different states or between citizens of the United States and citizens of foreign countries (where the amount in controversy exceeds $75,000). The latter is known as diversity jurisdiction . Thus, we see that there are many different uses for the term “jurisdiction.” But one thing is certain, without it, courts are powerless to act.

In Personam Jurisdiction. In personam jurisdic-tion or “jurisdiction over the person” refers to the court’s power over a certain individual or corporation. No party can be made to appear before a court unless that court has personal jurisdiction. If there is no personal jurisdiction, the case will be dismissed upon the defendant’s motion. Typically, jurisdiction is obtained by having a summons served on an individual or on the legal agent of a corporation. In certain types of cases, service over those not present in the territory can be done by registered mail or even through publication in the “legal notices” section of approved newspapers. In the United States, the Due Process Clauses of the 5th and 14th Amendments to the U.S. Constitution require obtaining service of process on a defendant in a case, and of having jurisdiction over them. The method used must be authorized by statute and be fundamentally fair. The basic concept is that one should not be “hauled into court” in some distant state or country unless that person has some connection to that place.

Requirement for In Personam Jurisdiction: Minimum Contacts. At one time in U.S. legal history, the U.S. Supreme Court had interpreted the Due Process Clause to limit personal jurisdiction to people physically present in the court’s territory. As the nation grew and as interstate commerce expanded, the concept was broadened to allow jurisdiction over persons who were not present within the court’s geographical territory, but who, for reasons of justice and fairness, should be held to answer a complaint there. A modern example is a state “implied consent” statute, by which one operating a motor vehicle on the highways of a state “impliedly consents” to submitting



to the jurisdiction of the courts of that state for all suits arising out of the operation of the vehicle there.

The due process requirements for in personam jurisdiction over persons absent from a state or territory have been carefully considered by the courts. In the now famous language of U.S. Supreme Court decisions dealing with both interstate and international commerce, “due process requires only that in order to subject a defendant to a judgment in personam, if he be not present within the territory of the forum, he have certain minimum contacts with it such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.” International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310 (1945).

Just how much of a connection to a foreign state or country does it take for the courts to require one to defend a case there? The courts answer the question on a case-by-case basis, looking to see whether it would be fair to ask a nonresident to come to their jurisdiction to defend a case. The courts look at many factors, including the extent of the defendant’s presence in the state, what business he or she may have conducted there, the burden on the defendant, fairness to the plaintiff, and the interest of the state in having the case resolved there. Did the defendant have an office, branch location, or salespeople in the territory of the forum? Did any of its employees or agents travel there on business? Did it advertise or otherwise solicit business there? Did it ship goods there? Did it enter into a contract there, or was the contract to be performed there? In Worldwide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286 (1980), the U.S. Supreme Court stated that a New York automobile distributor was not required to appear in Oklahoma to defend a products liability suit based on the sale of a vehicle that took place in New York and was later involved in a serious accident in Oklahoma.

Petitioners carry on no activity whatsoever in Oklahoma. They close no sales and perform no services there. They avail themselves of none of the privileges and benefits of Oklahoma law. They solicit no business there either through salespersons or through advertising reasonably calculated to reach the State. Nor does the record show that they regularly sell cars at wholesale or retail to Oklahoma customers or residents or that they indirectly, through others, serve or seek to serve the Oklahoma market. In short, respondents seek to base jurisdiction on one, isolated occurrence and whatever inferences can be drawn therefrom: the fortuitous circumstance that a single Audi automobile, sold in New York to New York residents, happened to suffer an accident while passing through Oklahoma.


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	63




A similar concept exists in the international context. The following case, Asahi Metal Ind. v. Superior Ct. of California, questions whether a Japanese manufacturing company should be forced to defend a lawsuit in California for an accident that occurred there. As you read, keep in mind that these cases are resolved on a case-by-case basis after a consideration of all of the facts. A decision on



jurisdiction may depend on one or more different factors not present in other cases. In other words, it is very difficult for lawyers to counsel whether your actions will or will not subject you to a foreign court’s jurisdiction sometime in the future. In reading this case, think about what factors, if they had been present, might have forced Asahi to appear in court in California.



Asahi Metal Industry, Co. v.
Superior Court of California, Solano County

480 U.S. 102 (1987)	United States Supreme Court


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Asahi Metal Industry, a Japanese corporation, manu-factured valve assemblies in Japan and sold them to tire manufacturers including Cheng Shin (a Taiwanese corporation) from 1978–1982. Cheng Shin sold tires all over the world, including in California. On September 23, 1978, in Solano County, California, Gary Zurcher was injured riding his motorcycle. His wife was killed. He filed a products liability action against Cheng Shin, the manufacturer of his motorcycle’s tires, alleging that the tires were defective. Cheng Shin filed a cross-complaint seeking indemnification from Asahi. Cheng Shin settled with Zurcher. However, Cheng Shin pressed its action against Asahi. The California Su-preme Court held that California state courts possessed personal jurisdiction over Asahi, and Asahi sought review by the U.S. Supreme Court. The case presented the question of whether a dispute between a Taiwanese company and a Japanese company with the above-described relationship to California should be heard by the California courts. In other words, did the California courts have personal jurisdiction over Asahi?


JUSTICE O’CONNOR

The placement of a product into the stream of commerce, without more, is not an act of the defendant purposefully directed toward the forum State. Addi-tional conduct of the defendant may indicate an intent or purpose to serve the market in the forum State, for example, designing the product for the market in the forum State, advertising in the forum State, establish-ing channels for providing regular advice to customers in the forum State, or marketing the product through a distributor who has agreed to serve as the sales agent in the forum State. But a defendant’s awareness that the stream of commerce may or will sweep the product

into the forum State does not convert the mere act of placing the product into the stream into an act purposefully directed toward the forum State.

Assuming, arguendo, that respondents have estab-lished Asahi’s awareness that some of the valves sold to Cheng Shin would be incorporated into tire tubes sold in California, respondents have not demonstrated any action by Asahi to purposefully avail itself of the California market. It has no office, agents, employees, or property in California. It does not advertise or otherwise solicit business in California. It did not create, control, or employ the distribution system that brought its valves to California. There is no evidence that Asahi designed its product in anticipa-tion of sales in California. On the basis of these facts, the exertion of personal jurisdiction over Asahi by the Superior Court of California exceeds the limits of due process.

The strictures of the Due Process Clause forbid a state court from exercising personal jurisdiction over Asahi under circumstances that would offend “tradi-tional notions of fair play and substantial justice.” International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945), quoting Milliken v. Meyer, 311 457, 463 (1940).

We have previously explained that the determina-tion of the reasonableness of the exercise of jurisdic-tion in each case will depend on an evaluation of several factors …

Certainly the burden on the defendant in this case is severe. Asahi has been commanded by the Supreme Court of California not only to traverse the distance between Asahi’s headquarters in Japan and the Super-ior Court of California in and for the County of Solano, but also to submit its dispute with Cheng Shin to a foreign nation’s judicial system. The unique burdens placed upon one who must defend oneself in a foreign

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




continued



legal system should have significant weight in asses-sing the reasonableness of stretching the long arm of personal jurisdiction over national borders.

When minimum contacts have been established, often the interests of the plaintiff and the forum in the exercise of jurisdiction will justify even the serious burdens placed on the alien defendant. In the present case, however, the interests of the plaintiff and the forum in California’s assertion of jurisdiction over Asahi are slight. All that remains is a claim for indemnification asserted by Cheng Shin, a Taiwanese corporation, against Asahi. The transaction on which the indemnification claim is based took place in Taiwan; Asahi’s components were shipped from Japan to Taiwan. Cheng Shin has not demonstrated that it is more convenient for it to litigate its indemnifi-cation claim against Asahi in California rather than in Taiwan or Japan.

Because the plaintiff is not a California resident, California’s legitimate interests in the dispute have considerably diminished. The Supreme Court of Califor-nia argued that the State had an interest in “protecting its consumers by ensuring that foreign manufacturers comply with the state’s safety standards.”…The State Supreme Court’s definition of California’s interest, how-ever, was overly broad. The dispute between Cheng Shin and Asahi is primarily about indemnification rather than safety. Moreover, it is not at all clear at this point that California law should govern the question whether a Japanese corporation should indemnify a Taiwanese corporation on the basis of a sale made in Taiwan and a shipment of goods from Japan to Taiwan.

Considering the international context, the heavy burden on the alien defendant, and the slight interests of the plaintiff and the forum State, the exercise of personal jurisdiction by a California court over Asahi in this instance would be unreasonable and unfair.

Because the facts of this case do not establish minimum contacts such that the exercise of personal jurisdiction is consistent with fair play and substantial justice, the judgment of Supreme Court of California is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.

It is so ordered.

Decision. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Ca-lifornia Supreme Court and found that there was no jurisdiction. This Supreme Court case is significant be-cause it lists several factors that will be taken into ac-count in determining whether a court has personal jurisdiction.



Case Questions

1.Why did the Court refuse to hold that the California courts had personal jurisdiction over Asahi?

2.In what activities would Asahi need to have engaged in order for the Court to determine that it had purposefully availed itself of California law? Are some of these activities more important than others? If so, which ones?

3.Did the Court give adequate weight to California’s interest in the safety of products distributed in the state? Why or why not?



Jurisdiction in the European Union. Jurisdiction in civil and commercial cases between parties domiciled in two or more European Union (EU) countries is determined by EU Council Regulation No. 44/2001. This law became effective in 2002 and replaced the 1968 Brussels Convention on Jurisdiction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters. The general rule is that jurisdiction is determined by the domicile of the defendant. The regulation states that “persons domiciled in a Member State shall, whatever their nationality, be sued in the courts of that Member State.” Corpora-tions are domiciled in the Member State (i.e., member country of the EU) where they are incorporated, where they have their primary admin-istrative offices, or where they have their principal place of business.


There are several exceptions to this general rule:

1.Cases involving commercial contracts for the sale of goods within the EU will be heard in the country where the goods were or should have been delivered.

2.Cases involving a breach of contract for services (other than insurance or employment) within the EU will be heard where the services were or should have been provided.

3.Tort cases, such as an action arising out of an automobile accident, will be heard before the courts in the country where the wrong occurred.

4.In consumer contract cases, a consumer may bring an action against the other party to the contract either in the country in which that party is domiciled or in the country where the




Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	65




consumer is domiciled. Lawsuits against a con-sumer to enforce the contract can only be brought in the courts of the consumer’s home country.

5.An employer may sue its employee or former employee only in the employee’s place of domi-cile. However, an employee may bring a lawsuit against an employer either in the country where the employee is domiciled; where the employer is domiciled, or, if not domiciled in the EU, where a branch or agent is located; or in the country where the employee regularly or last worked.

6.Where at least one of the parties is domiciled in the EU, by an agreement specifying the courts of a certain EU country, provided that the agreement is in written or electronic form, or in international cases, in a form that the parties should have known amounted to a forum selection.

Jurisdiction in China. Chinese courts may not exercise jurisdiction over non-resident defendants who are merely present in China. Rather, the non-resident defendant must have a meaningful connec-tion to China which provides a “sufficient ground” warranting the exercise of the court’s power. The Civil Procedure Law of 1991 grants jurisdiction to Chinese courts based upon a non-resident defendant’s conduct or property. For example, courts may exercise



jurisdiction if a contract was concluded or performed in China. In such a circumstance, the Chinese court at the place of the contract or performance would possess jurisdiction over the parties. A non-resident defendant may be subject to personal jurisdiction if the subject matter of a claim is located in China, if the defendant has property in China or maintains a representative office in China. An additional “suffi-cient ground” for exercising personal jurisdiction is if the non-resident defendant committed a tort in China.

Jurisdiction in the Internet Age. As electronic commerce brings the world closer together, there will likely be more disputes between parties in distant countries. How will the courts fashion rules for deciding when a party must defend itself against litigation in foreign courts? Just as the meaning of “minimum contacts” adapted to the rise of interstate commerce in the United States over 60 years ago, it is now adapting to the rise of the Internet age. The following case, Pebble Beach Company v. Caddy, involves trademark infringement and dilution and demonstrates the challenges litigants and courts confront in determining whether and under what circumstances a presence on the Internet subjects a defendant to personal jurisdiction.



Pebble Beach Company v. Caddy

453 F.3d 1151 (2006)	United States Court of Appeals (9th Cir.)


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Plaintiff Pebble Beach Company (Pebble Beach) is a well-known golf course and resort located in Monterey County, California. The golf resort has used “Pebble Beach” as its trade name since 1956. Pebble Beach contended that the trade name has acquired secondary meaning in the United States and the United Kingdom. Pebble Beach operates a website located at www. pebblebeach.com. Defendant Caddy ran a three-room bed and breakfast, restaurant, and bar located in southern England. Caddy’s business operation was located on a cliff overlooking the pebbly beaches of England’s south shore, in a town called Barton-on-Sea. The name of Caddy’s operation was “Pebble Beach.” Caddy advertised his services, which did not include a golf course, at his website, www.pebblebeach-uk.com. Caddy’s website included information about the accommodations he provided, including lodging rates

in pounds sterling, a menu, and a wine list. The website was not interactive. It did not have a reservation system and did not allow potential guests to book rooms or pay for services online. Visitors to the website who had questions about Caddy’s services were required to fill out an online inquiry form. Pebble Beach sued Caddy for infringement and dilution of its “Pebble Beach” trademark in the United States District Court for the Central District of California. Caddy moved to dismiss the complaint for lack of personal jurisdiction. The district court granted Caddy’s motion, and Pebble Beach appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth


TROTT, NINTH CIRCUIT JUDGE

The general rule is that personal jurisdiction over a defendant is proper if it is permitted by a long-arm statute and if the exercise of that jurisdiction does not

continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




continued



violate federal due process … For due process to be satisfied, a defendant, if not present in the forum, must have “minimum contacts” with the forum state such that the assertion of jurisdiction “does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.” Int’l Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 315, 66 S. Ct. 154, 90 L. Ed. 95 (1945).

In this circuit, we employ the following three-part test to analyze whether a party’s “minimum contacts” meet the Supreme Court’s directive. This “minimum contacts” test is satisfied when (1) the defendant has performed some act or consummated some transac-tion within the forum or otherwise purposefully availed himself of the privileges of conducting activities in the forum, (2) the claim arises out of or results from the defendant’s forum-related activities, and (3) the exer-cise of jurisdiction is reasonable.

Bancroft & Masters, Inc. v. Augusta Nat’l Inc., 223 F.3d 1082, 1086 (9th Cir. 2000).

* * *

In order to satisfy the first prong of the “minimum contacts” test, Pebble Beach must establish either that Caddy (1) purposefully availed himself of the privilege of conducting activities in California, or the United States as a whole, or (2) that he purposefully directed its activities toward one of those two forums.

Pebble Beach fails to identify any conduct by Caddy that took place in California or in the United States that adequately supports the availment concept. Evidence of availment is typically action taking place in the forum that invokes the benefits and protections of the laws in the forum. Evidence of direction generally consists of action taking place outside the forum that is directed at the forum. All of Caddy’s action identified by Pebble Beach is action taking place outside the forum. Thus, if anything, it is the type of evidence that supports a purposeful direction analysis. Accordingly, we reject Pebble Beach’s assertion that Caddy has availed himself of the jurisdiction of the district court … and proceed only to determine whether Caddy has pur-posefully directed his action toward one of two applicable forums.

In Calder v. Jones, the Supreme Court held that a foreign act that is both aimed at and has effect in the forum satisfies the first prong of the specific jurisdic-tion analysis 465 U.S. 783, 104 S. Ct. 1482, 79 L. Ed. 2d 804 (1984). We have commonly referred to this holding as the “Calder effects test.” To satisfy this test the defendant must have (1) committed an intentional act, which was (2) expressly aimed at the forum state, and

(3)caused harm, the brunt of which is suffered and which the defendant knows is likely to be suffered in the forum state. However … we have warned courts

not to focus too narrowly on the test’s third prong-the effects prong-holding that “something more” is needed in addition to a mere foreseeable effect. Bancroft, 223 F.3d at 1087… . Thus, the determinative question here is whether Caddy’s actions were “something more”—precisely, whether his conduct was expressly aimed at California or alternatively the United States.

* * *

In support of its contention that Caddy has expressly aimed conduct at California, Pebble Beach … asserts that Caddy’s website and domain name are sufficient to satisfy the express aiming standard that it is required to meet. We disagree.

* * *

In Rio Properties, Inc. v. Rio Int’l Interlink, 284 F.3d 1007, 1020 (9th Cir. 2000), we cited Cybersell, Inc. v. Cybersell, Inc., 130 F.3d 414, 418-20 (9th Cir. 1997), for the proposition that when a “website advertiser [does] nothing other than register a domain name and post an essentially passive website” and nothing else is done “to encourage residents of the forum state,” there is no personal jurisdiction… . These cases establish two salient points. First, there can be no doubt that we still require “something more” than just a foreseeable effect to conclude that personal jurisdic-tion is proper. Second, an Internet domain name and passive website alone are not “something more,” and, therefore, alone are not enough to subject a party to jurisdiction.

* * *

Even if Pebble Beach is unable to show purposeful direction as to California, Pebble Beach can still establish jurisdiction if Caddy purposefully directed his action at the United States.

* * *

Pebble Beach claims that because Caddy selected a “.com” domain name it shows that the United States was his “primary” market and that he is directly advertising his services to the United States. Second, Pebble Beach asserts that his selection of the name “Pebble Beach” shows the United States is his primary target because “Pebble Beach” is a famous United States trademark. Third, Pebble Beach asserts that Caddy’s intent to advertise to the United States is bolstered by the fact that Caddy’s facilities are located in a resort town that caters to foreigners, particularly Americans. Finally, Pebble Beach asserts that a major-ity of Caddy’s business in the past has been with Americans.

Pebble Beach’s arguments focus too much on the effects prong and not enough on the “something more” requirement. We conclude that the selection of

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	67



continued



a particular domain name is insufficient by itself to confer jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant where the forum is the United States. The fact that the name “Pebble Beach” is a famous mark known worldwide is of little practical consequence when deciding whether action is directed at a particular forum via the world wide web. Also of minimal importance is Caddy’s selection of a “.com” domain name instead of a more specific United Kingdom or European Union domain. To suggest that “.com” is an indicator of express aiming at the United States is even weaker than the counter assertion that having “U.K.” in the domain name, which is the case here, is indicative that Caddy was only targeting his services to the United Kingdom. Neither provides much more than a slight indication of where a website may be located and does not establish to whom the website is directed.


This leaves Pebble Beach’s arguments that because Caddy’s business is located in an area frequented by Americans, and because he occasionally services Americans, jurisdiction is proper. These arguments fail for the same reasons; they go to effects rather than express aiming. Pebble Beach’s arguments do have intuitive appeal-they suggest a real effect on Amer-icans. However, as reiterated throughout this opinion, showing “effect” satisfies only the third prong of the Calder test—it is not the "something more" that is required… . The “something more” additional require-ment is important simply because the effects cited may

not have been caused by the defendant’s actions of which the plaintiff complains. Here, although Caddy may serve vacationing Americans, there is not a scintilla of evidence indicating that this patronage is related to either Caddy’s choice of a domain name or the posting of a passive website.

Decision. Caddy did not purposefully avail himself of U.S. law nor expressly aim his conduct at California or the United States. Therefore, he is not subject to the personal jurisdiction of the district court. A passive web-site and domain name alone do not satisfy the effects test, and there was no other action expressly aimed at California or the United States that would justify per-sonal jurisdiction. Pebble Beach’s complaint was prop-erly dismissed.


Case Questions

1.On what basis did the court hold that Caddy had insufficient minimum contacts with the United States such as to support the exercise of personal jurisdiction?

2.Is the court’s focus on the passivity of Caddy’s website valid? What factors determine whether a website is interactive or passive?

3.Is the Internet sufficiently different from non-electronically based businesses to merit different treatment for purposes of jurisdiction? Why or why not?




Obtaining Jurisdiction by Service of Process. As we have learned, a court must have personal jurisdiction over individuals or corporate entities before they can be made to appear and defend a civil case. Personal jurisdiction is obtained through lawful service of process. Without proper service, any judgment that might be taken will not be enforceable. This is especially problematic when attempting to enforce a judgment internationally. To illustrate, imagine that an American plaintiff files suit in a U.S. court against a resident of France on a contract that was performed in the United States. Assume that the plaintiff’s attorney is able to obtain service of process upon the defendant in France. The French citizen does not appear in the United States and a default judgment is entered. When the American attempts to enforce the U.S. judgment in the courts of France, the defendant will claim that the method of service of process upon him was unsatisfactory under French law. If the French courts



agree, the plaintiff’s judgment may be worth nothing if the defendant’s only assets are in France. Thus, international lawyers trying to obtain jurisdiction over a foreign defendant are advised to consult an attorney in the defendant’s country and to follow the requirements of both U.S. and French law to the letter.

Service of process upon a foreign defendant is addressed in The Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extra-judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, in force in more than 60 countries. Authorized methods of service are different even for countries that are members of the treaty. Some countries permit service through the use of registered or certified mail, with a return receipt signed by the defendant being served, although other countries (e.g., Germany, Norway, Egypt, China, and others) do not permit this method. Some countries permit personal service by an agent or attorney of the plaintiff located in the defendant’s country who signs



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




an “affidavit of service” at a nearby U.S. embassy affirming that he or she has served the defendant with notice and a copy of the complaint. Most countries require the complaint to be in the local language as well as in English. Perhaps the safest method, but one that can cause very long delays (up to a year, according to the U.S. State Department), is a formal request for service made through a letter rogatory (a “letter of request” sent through diplomatic channels) that results in personal service on the defendant by the courts of the country in which he or she is found. Defendants located in countries not parties to this convention can also be served with process with a letter rogatory.

Venue

Jurisdiction is often confused with the concept of venue. Venue refers to the geographical location of a court of competent jurisdiction where a case can be heard. While the courts of several different states or countries may have proper jurisdiction, the concept of venue helps decide which one of these should actually hear the case. For instance, in some civil lawsuits between citizens of different states, we know that the federal courts may have jurisdiction. But in which federal districts should the suits be tried?

Imagine an automobile accident in which the passengers of one car are residents of Pennsylvania, while the driver of the other vehicle is a resident of North Carolina, and the accident occurs while they are both on vacation in California. We know that jurisdiction is proper in the federal courts (and it may also be proper in some state courts). But we certainly would not expect that the case could be tried in a federal court located in Montana. Federal rules generally permit the case to be heard where all of the plaintiffs reside, where all of the defendants reside, or where the cause of action arose. (In complex transnational litigation, it is not unusual that courts in several countries might attempt to exercise jurisdiction over the matter.) While typically the plaintiff will initially choose where to file its suit, it is not unusual for a defendant to request a change of venue, asking that the case be removed to a location that is more convenient and that has a closer connection to the facts of the particular case.

Forum Non Conveniens

The legal doctrine of forum non conveniens (meaning “inconvenient forum”) refers to the discretionary



power of a court to refuse to hear a case, even though jurisdiction and venue are otherwise proper, because a court in another jurisdiction or location would be more convenient and justice would be better served. According to this doctrine, whenever a case is properly heard in the courts of more than one jurisdiction, it should be heard in the jurisdiction that is more convenient and has the closer connec-tion to the cause of action that led to the case. In deciding on where to hear a case, the courts will examine both “private factors” (factors affecting the convenience of the parties and their ability to pursue their claims) and “public factors” (factors related to the public interest) . For example, it may be more convenient to hear a case where the action arose, where witnesses and evidence are located, where the parties reside, or in the state or country whose law applies to the case.

Imagine an airline disaster in the United States, with many plaintiffs and one airline. Jurisdiction may be proper in any number of locations, including the airline’s principal place of business. But would it not be more convenient to hold the trial where the crash occurred? After all, that is where the wreckage is located, and where the controllers and other witnesses live and work. Forum non conveniens is applied by courts in the United States, as well as in many other countries. In the United States, it is applied by the federal courts in determining where to hear lawsuits between citizens of different states. It is also used in determining whether an interna-tional case should be heard by U.S. courts or by the courts of some other country. It is not unusual for one of the parties to a case to ask a court to transfer the case to another judicial district or location for reasons of convenience. The factors generally considered are described by the U.S. Supreme Court in Gulf Oil v. Gilbert, 330 U.S. 501 (1947).

Important considerations are the relative ease of access to sources of proof; availability of compulsory process for attendance of unwilling [witnesses] and the cost of obtaining attendance of willing witnesses; … and all other practical problems that make trial of a case easy, expeditious and inexpensive. There may also be questions as to the enforceability of a judgment if one is obtained … It is often said that the plaintiff may not, by choice of an inconvenient forum, “vex,” “harass,” or “oppress” the defendant by inflicting upon him expense or trouble not necessary to his own right to pursue his remedy. But unless


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	69




the balance is strongly in favor of the defendant, the plaintiff’s choice of forum should rarely be disturbed … There is a local interest in having localized controversies decided at home. There is an appropriateness, too, in having the trial of a diversity case in a forum that is at home with the state law that must govern the case, rather than having a court in some other forum untangle problems in conflict of laws, and in law foreign to itself.

Forum non Conveniens in Action: In re Union Carbide Gas Plant Disaster at Bhopal. After a chemical leak at a plant in Bhopal, India, killed almost 2,000 people, Indian citizens filed suit in the United States against Union Carbide. At one point, almost 145 legal actions on behalf of some 200,000 plaintiffs had been consolidated for trial in federal court in New York. However, the case was subsequently dismissed on the basis of forum non conveniens in favor of the case being heard in India. The judge gave many reasons for the decision: the Indian legal system was better able to determine the cause of accident and assign liability; the over-whelming majority of witnesses and evidence were in India; the records of plant design, safety procedures, and training were located in India; most records were not in English and many witnesses did not speak English; the court would be unable to compel witnesses to appear and the cost to transport them to the United States would be prohibitive; visits to the plant might be necessary; there was the likelihood that the U.S. court would have to apply Indian law (the tort law of the jurisdiction where the accident occurred); and the undue burden of this immense litigation would unfairly tax an American tribunal. Also considered was India’s substantial interest in the accident and the outcome of the litigation: The Indian govern-ment and Indian citizens owned 49 percent of the plant, with Union Carbide owning the rest. As the judge expressed in the opinion:


To retain litigation in this forum would be another example of imperialism, another situation in which an established sovereign inflicted its rules, its standards and values on a developing nation. This Court declines to play such a role. The Union of India is a world power in 1986, and its courts have the proven capacity to mete out fair and equal justice. To deprive the Indian judiciary of this opportunity to stand tall before the world and to pass judgment on behalf of its own people would be to revive a history of subservience and subjugation from which India has emerged. India and its



people can and must vindicate their claims before the independent and legitimate judiciary created there since the Independence of 1947. This Court defers to the adequacy and ability of the courts of India. Their interest in the sad events … in the City of Bhopal, State of Madhya Pradesh, Union of India, is not subject to question or challenge. In re Union Carbide Gas Plant Disaster at Bhopal, 634 F. Supp. 842, 867 (S.D.N.Y. 1986).

The case was settled in India prior to trial in 1989 when Union Carbide agreed to pay $470 million in compensation. In 2010, an Indian court convicted several former Union Carbide officers of crimes arising from the accident.

Forum Shopping. It is not unusual that requests to transfer on the basis of forum non conveniens are in truth attempts by counsel to “shop around” for a better legal deal. They may be looking for laws that are more favorable to their cases or for juries that might be more sympathetic to their sides. After all, in federal lawsuits between residents of different states, such as in tort cases, the federal courts apply the laws of the states in which they sit.

Although there are procedural rules that discourage “forum shopping,” it still weighs on the minds of most trial lawyers. The same is true, perhaps even more so, in international cases which may involve several considerations. For example, there may be procedural reasons for forum shopping, such as the availability of a jury trial, class action procedures, and liberal discovery rules. The availability of property that may be readily attached may lead some litigants to select specific forums. Forum shopping may occur in order to avoid resolution of a dispute in a country where the judicial system suffers from a perceived lack of integrity. Provisions affecting the compensation of attorneys, such as the availability of contingent fees and awards of attorney’s fees, may also encourage forum shopping.

A significant motivation for forum shopping is the perception that U.S. courts will be more likely to award larger amounts of damages to injured parties than courts in other countries. This perception is very strong in the area of punitive damages, which are designed to punish a defendant for particularly offensive behavior (such as intentional torts, fraud, and bad faith) and deter future misconduct. Punitive damages are recognized in other common law countries such as Australia, Canada, England, India, and New Zealand, although with different


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




restrictions and in lesser amounts than may be awarded in the United States. The majority of the rest of the world’s legal systems reject punitive damages. For example, as a matter of public policy Japanese courts do not award punitive damages and Japanese law prohibits the recognition of foreign judgments containing punitive awards. Like most civil law countries, France and Germany have long adhered to the traditional rule that prohibits awards of punitive damages in civil actions. The French Civil Code limits damages in civil actions to placing the injured party in the position it would have occupied had the defendant’s conduct not occurred. German courts traditionally consider the prohibition on punitive damages to be a matter of fundamental public policy.

However, there has been a gradual move away from wholesale rejection of punitive damages in states whose legal systems derive from traditions other than common law. For example, in 2010, the French Cour de Cassation (French Supreme Court) refused to recognize a U.S. court judgment that awarded the plaintiffs $1.46 million in punitive damages. However, the basis for the decision was that the amount was disproportionate to the $1.39 million compensatory damages award rather than that punitive damage awards are contrary to French public policy. Also, recent German court judgments contain elements that are not purely compensatory in nature such as for claims of invasion of personal privacy and employ-ment discrimination and for pain and suffering.



Although Spanish courts do not award punitive damages in private actions, in 2001, the Tribunal Supremo enforced a Texas judgment that included treble damages arising from misuse of a U.S. trademark by a Spanish company.

Other countries limit punitive damages through statutes. Perhaps most importantly is the enactment of the People’s Republic of China’s Tort Liability Law in December 2009. Effective in July 2010, the law unifies tort law in numerous fields including product liability, environmental pollution, medical malpractice, and motor vehicle accidents. Of particular importance is the section devoted to product liability. In response to several tainted product scandals in the country, the new law permits an award of punitive damages against a manufacturer or seller who knows that a product is defective but nevertheless continues to manufacture or sell the product if such product subsequently results in death or serious physical injury to consumers. The law represents the first time that the term “punitive damages” officially appears in Chinese law. However, the method by which such damages are to be calculated and any limits on their amounts are undefined.

In the following case, Iragorri v. United Technolo-gies, the appellate court had to decide whether a case for wrongful death should be heard in Connecticut or in Cali, Colombia. The plaintiffs wanted the case heard in Connecticut because, as one would expect, the possibility of winning a large damage award was much greater than in Colombia.





Iragorri v. United Technologies Corp. & Otis Elevator Co.

274 F. 3d 65 (2001)	United States Court of Appeals (2d Cir.)


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Iragorri and his family had been residents of Florida since 1981, and naturalized citizens of the United States since 1989. In 1993, while visiting his mother in Cali, Colombia, Iragorri fell to his death through an open elevator shaft. Iragorri’s children had been attending school there as exchange students from their Florida high school. His surviving wife and children brought this action in U.S. District Court in Connecticut for damages against two American companies, Otis Eleva-tor and its parent corporation, United Technologies. They alleged that employees of International Elevator

had negligently wedged a door open with a screwdriver during repairs, leaving the shaft open. International Elevator was a Maine corporation doing business in South America. Both Otis and United had their principal place of business in Connecticut. The complaint alleged that Otis and United were liable because (1) Interna-tional had acted as their agent in negligently repairing the elevator, and (2) Otis and United were liable under Connecticut’s products liability statute for the defective design and manufacture of the elevator that had been sold and installed by their affiliate, Otis of Brazil. Otis and United moved to dismiss the case on the basis of

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	71



continued



forum non conveniens, arguing that it should be heard in the Colombian courts. The U.S. District Court dismissed the case, and the plaintiffs brought this appeal.

OPINION BY PIERRE N. LEVAL AND JOSÉ A. CABRANES, CIRCUIT JUDGES FOR THE COURT SITTING EN BANC

We regard the Supreme Court’s instructions that (1) a plaintiff’s choice of her home forum should be given great deference, while (2) a foreign resident’s choice of a U.S. forum should receive less consideration, as representing consistent applications of a broader principle under which the degree of deference to be given to a plaintiff’s choice of forum moves on a sliding scale depending on several relevant considerations.

The Supreme Court explained in Piper Aircraft Co. v. Reyno, [citation omitted] that the reason we give deference to a plaintiff’s choice of her home forum is because it is presumed to be convenient. (“When the home forum has been chosen, it is reasonable to assume that this choice is convenient.”) In contrast, when a foreign plaintiff chooses a U.S. forum, it “is much less reasonable” to presume that the choice was made for convenience. In such circumstances, a plausible likelihood exists that the selection was made for forum-shopping reasons, such as the percep-tion that United States courts award higher damages than are common in other countries. Even if the U.S. district was not chosen for such forum-shopping reasons, there is nonetheless little reason to assume that it is convenient for a foreign plaintiff.

Based on the Supreme Court’s guidance, our understanding of how courts should address the degree of deference to be given to a plaintiff’s choice of a U.S. forum is essentially as follows: The more it appears that a domestic or foreign plaintiff’s choice of forum has been dictated by reasons that the law recognizes as valid, the greater the deference that will be given to the plaintiff’s forum choice. Stated differ-ently, the greater the plaintiff’s or the lawsuit’s bona fide connection to the United States and to the forum of choice and the more it appears that considerations of convenience favor the conduct of the lawsuit in the United States, the more difficult it will be for the defendant to gain dismissal for forum non conveniens. Thus, factors that argue against forum non conveniens dismissal include the convenience of the plaintiff’s residence in relation to the chosen forum, the availabil-ity of witnesses or evidence to the forum district, the defendant’s amenability to suit in the forum district, the availability of appropriate legal assistance, and other

reasons relating to convenience or expense. On the other hand, the more it appears that the plaintiff’s choice of a U.S. forum was motivated by forum-shopping reasons—such as attempts to win a tactical advantage resulting from local laws that favor the plaintiff’s case, the habitual generosity of juries in the United States or in the forum district, the plaintiff’s popularity or the defendant’s unpopularity in the region, or the inconvenience and expense to the defendant resulting from litigation in that forum—the less deference the plaintiff’s choice commands and, consequently, the easier it becomes for the defendant to succeed on a forum non conveniens motion by showing that convenience would be better served by litigating in another country’s courts.

We believe that the District Court in the case before us, lacking the benefit of our most recent opinions concerning forum non conveniens, did not accord appropriate deference to the plaintiff’s chosen forum. Although the plaintiffs had resided temporar-ily in Bogota at the time of Mauricio Iragorri’s accident, it appears that they had returned to their permanent, long-time domicile in Florida by the time the suit was filed. The fact that the children and their mother had spent a few school terms in Colombia on a foreign exchange program seems to us to present little reason for discrediting the bona fides of their choice of the Connecticut forum. Heightened defer-ence to the plaintiffs’ chosen forum usually applies even where a plaintiff has temporarily or intermit-tently resided in the foreign jurisdiction. So far as the record reveals, there is little indication that the plaintiffs chose the defendants’ principal place of business for forum-shopping reasons. Plaintiffs were apparently unable to obtain jurisdiction in Florida over the original third defendant, International, but could obtain jurisdiction overall three in Connecticut. It appears furthermore that witnesses and documen-tary evidence relevant to plaintiffs’ defective design theory are to be found at the defendants’ installations in Connecticut. As we have explained, “live testimony of key witnesses is necessary so that the trier of fact can assess the witnesses’ demeanor.” Alfadda v. Fenn, 159 F.3d 41, 48 (2d Cir. 1998). Also, in assessing where the greater convenience lies, the District Court must of course consider how great would be the inconvenience and difficulty imposed on the plaintiffs were they forced to litigate in Cali. Among other factors, plaintiffs claim that they fear for their safety in Cali and that various witnesses on both sides may be unwilling to travel to Cali; if these concerns are warranted, they appear highly relevant to the balanc-ing inquiry that the District Court must conduct.



continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




continued

Decision.   Remanded to the U.S. District Court for ade-	2.  Does   the   court’s   opinion   reward   forum
termination in accordance with this opinion. In deciding	shopping	to  the  extent	the  plaintiffs  were
whether to hear the case, the district court should consider	likely to receive a larger damages award in the
the degree of deference to which plaintiffs’ choice is enti-	United  States	than  in	Colombia?	Why  or
tled, the hardships of litigating in Colombia versus the	why not?				
United States, and the public interest factors involved.	3.  The court	cited	concern regarding the	unstable
Case Questions	political situation in Colombia as a reason for
	refusing to apply forum non conveniens. Given the
1.  What were the court’s reasons for refusing to apply	changes that have occurred in the country in the
forum non conveniens to this case and requiring	past decade, would the court reach the same
refiling of the litigation in Colombia?	conclusion today?		
					


Forum Selection Clauses

Businesspeople and lawyers negotiating international contracts can avoid much of the uncertainty over jurisdiction and venue by including a forum selection clause in their contracts. A forum selection clause is a provision in a contract that fixes in advance the jurisdiction in which any disputes will be arbitrated or litigated. It provides certainty because the parties know where and how a dispute will be resolved in the event of a breach. One of the major advantages of these clauses is that they eliminate the last-minute attempt by lawyers to go “forum shopping” by filing suits in jurisdictions that offer the best law for their cases. The last chance for forum shopping may very well be during contract negotiations. This allows both parties to agree on a forum, perhaps the courts of a certain country, which they find acceptable. Of course, the reality is that these clauses are often not open for negotiation at all—the party to the contract with the greatest bargaining power will simply include a fine print provision calling for disputes to be resolved in the courts of the country where it is located.

Historically, any attempt by private parties to control jurisdiction was viewed with hostility by the courts as an effort to usurp their authority. However, the realities of the international marketplace and the need to reduce uncertainty in a dispute have persuaded many courts to accept forum selection clauses. Today, they are generally accepted as valid provided that the forum chosen has some reasonable connection to the transaction. In the following case, M/S Bremen v. Zapata, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld a clause calling for disputes to be resolved before the English courts, noting that U.S. courts can no longer remain geocentric in light of modern-day international trade.

CONFLICT OF LAWS

As a general rule, courts apply the law in force in their jurisdictions to the cases before them. In the United States, state courts usually apply their own states’ laws. Federal courts hearing diversity of citizenship cases, such as breach of contract or tort actions between residents of different states, generally apply the laws of the states in which they sit (unless a federal statute or treaty controls). But these are general rules only, and there are many cases where courts apply the laws of other states, or even of foreign countries. The term conflict of laws refers to the rules by which courts determine which jurisdiction’s laws apply to a case and how to reconcile differences between laws. In turn, the choice of law ultimately determines whether a court has jurisdiction, the rights and liabilities of the parties, and how to enforce a judgment or monetary award.

The Restatement (Second) of the Conflict of Laws

Conflict of laws rules are some of the most complex in procedural law, with different jurisdictions following different rules. However, the concepts found in the Restatement (Second) of the Conflict of Laws, drafted under the auspices of the American Law Institute in 1971, provide a clear and widely accepted explanation of these rules. As a general rule, courts apply the law of the state, country, or jurisdiction that has the closest relationship to the action before them. The Restate-ment (Second) addresses different types of actions, including actions for breach of contract and for tort.

Contracts. It has been said that deciding which law governs a contract is like finding its “center of


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	73





M/S Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co.

407 U.S. 1(1972)	United States Supreme Court


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

In 1967, Zapata, a Houston-based corporation, entered into a contract with Unterweser, a German corporation, to tow Zapata’s drilling rig from Louisiana to Ravenna, Italy. The contract the parties signed contained the clause “Any dispute arising must be heard before the London Court of Justice.” During a storm, the rig was damaged, and Zapata instructed Unterweser’s tug, the Bremen, to tow instead to Tampa, Florida, the nearest port. Immediately thereafter, Zapata filed suit in federal district court in Tampa, Florida, on the basis of admiralty jurisdiction, seeking $3,500,000 damages in personam against Unter-weser and in rem against the Bremen. Unterweser moved to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction on the basis of the forum selection clause and forum non conveniens. Unterweser sought a stay of action pending resolution in the London Court of Justice.

The U.S. District Court and Court of Appeals denied the motion to stay, thus allowing the case to proceed in U.S. court despite the forum selection clause. Unter-weser filed a petition of certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court.


CHIEF JUSTICE BURGER

We hold, with the six dissenting members of the Court of Appeals, that far too little weight and effect were given to the forum clause in resolving this controversy. For at least two decades we have witnessed an expansion of overseas commercial activities by busi-ness enterprises based in the United States. The barrier of distance that once tended to confine a business concern to a modest territory no longer does so. Here we see an American company with special expertise contracting with a foreign company to tow a complex machine thousands of miles across seas and oceans. The expansion of American business and industry will hardly be encouraged if, notwithstanding solemn contracts, we insist on a parochial concept that all disputes must be resolved under our laws and in our courts. Absent a contract forum, the considerations relied on by the Court of Appeals would be persuasive reasons for holding an American forum convenient in the traditional sense, but in an era of expanding world trade and commerce, [prior cases that have decided otherwise] have little place and would be a heavy hand indeed on the future development of international commercial dealings by Americans. We cannot have trade and commerce in world markets and international

waters exclusively on our terms, governed by our laws, and resolved in our courts.

Forum-selection clauses have historically not been favored by American courts. Many courts, federal and state, have declined to enforce such clauses on the ground that they were “contrary to public policy,” or that their effect was to “oust the jurisdiction” of the court. Although this view apparently still has consider-able acceptance, other courts are tending to adopt a more hospitable attitude toward forum-selection clauses. This view, advanced in the well-reasoned dissenting opinion in the instant case, is that such clauses are prima facie valid and should be enforced unless enforcement is shown by the resisting party to be “unreasonable” under the circumstances. We believe this is the correct doctrine to be followed by federal district courts sitting in admiralty …

This approach is substantially what is followed in other common-law countries including England. It is the view advanced by noted scholars and that adopted by the Restatement of the Conflict of Laws. It accords with ancient concepts of freedom of contract and reflects an appreciation of the expanding horizons of American contractors who seek business in all parts of the world … The choice of that forum was made in an arm’s length negotiation by experienced and sophisti-cated businessmen, and absent some compelling and countervailing reason it should be honored by the parties and enforced by the courts.

The elimination of all such uncertainties by agreeing in advance on a forum acceptable to both parties is an indispensable element in international trade, com-merce, and contracting. There is strong evidence that the forum clause was a vital part of the agreement, and it would be unrealistic to think that the parties did not conduct their negotiations, including fixing the mone-tary terms, with the consequences of the forum clause figuring prominently in their calculations.

Thus, in the light of present-day commercial reali-ties and expanding international trade we conclude that the forum clause should control absent a strong showing that it should be set aside. Although their opinions are not altogether explicit, it seems reason-ably clear that the District Court and the Court of Appeals placed the burden on Unterweser to show that London would be a more convenient forum than Tampa, although the contract expressly resolved that issue. The correct approach would have been to enforce the forum clause specifically unless Zapata

continues



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




continued



could clearly show that enforcement would be unrea-sonable and unjust, or that the clause was invalid for such reasons as fraud or overreaching. Accordingly, the case must be remanded for reconsideration.

Decision. Vacated and remanded for proceedings consistent with the opinion.

Comment. The Supreme Court noted the possible reasons that a forum selection clause could be unenforceable, including: (1) if it contravenes strong public policy and (2) if the forum is seriously incon-venient. These reasons still hold true today. Other reasons forum selection clauses may be ignored by the courts are because parties are of unequal bar-gaining power; counsel was not consulted; the clause was written in a foreign language; the clause violates federal law; or circumstances have changed

(where the forum is the site of a revolution hostile to one party’s country—for example, a forum selection clause choosing Iran after the Islamic Revolution). Many other countries also support the validity of fo-rum selection clauses, including Austria, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, and many Latin American and Scandinavian countries.

Case Questions

1.What was the Court’s holding with respect to the general enforceability of forum selection clauses?

2.How would you define “public policy reasons” or “serious inconvenience” for purposes of refusing to uphold a forum selection clause? What factors would you take into account in making this determination?





gravity.” In other words, in the absence of an agreement by the parties, contracts should be governed by the law of the jurisdiction that has the most significant relationship to the transaction and the parties. The Restatement (Second) sets out five factors to be considered: (1) the place of contracting (i.e., where the acceptance took place); (2) the place where the contract was negotiated (particularly if the parties met and negotiated at length); (3) the place where the contract will be performed; (4) the location of the subject matter of the contract; and

(5)the domicile, residence, nationality, place of incorporation, and place of business of the parties. If the contract was both negotiated and performed in the same jurisdiction, then the law of that jurisdic-tion will apply (except for contracts involving real estate or life insurance, which have special rules). Of these, the place of negotiation and performance is often the most important factor, especially if both parties are performing within the same jurisdiction. The place of contracting and the domicile of the parties, while not critical by themselves, are impor-tant when supporting other factors.

Torts. Traditionally, the law in the United States and in most countries has been that tort actions, including personal injuries, product liability, wrong-ful death, fraud, and business torts, should be governed by the law of the place where the injury or damage occurred (known as lex loci delicti). In the United States, many courts are adopting the broader view taken by the Restatement (Second) that tort




liability should be governed by the law of the jurisdiction that has the most significant relationship to the tort and to the parties. The Restatement (Second) lists the following factors to be considered:

(1)the place where the injury occurred; (2) the place where the conduct causing the injury occurred; (3) the domicile, residence, nationality, place of incorpo-ration, and place of business of the parties; and (4) the place where the relationship between the parties is centered.

Choice of Law Clauses

Choice of law clauses are contract provisions that stipulate the country or jurisdiction whose law will apply in interpreting the contract or enforcing its terms. Lawyers are quite aware that laws can be very different from state to state or country to country and will consider this in contract negotiations. Indeed, the choice of law may well become a bargaining point in international contract negotia-tions. As a general rule, the choice of law selection will be upheld as long as there is a reasonable relationship between the transaction and the juris-diction chosen. As one court put it, parties today have several choices of law that could apply to their dealings, but they could not choose to have their disputes decided under the ancient Code of Ham-murabi. For example, imagine a Japanese manufac-turer who enters into a contract with a buyer in New York for the shipment of goods to New York. Both parties have offices in California and sign the


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	75




contract there. A clause making California law applicable to the contract would be valid, because there is a sufficient nexus, or connection, between the contract and the state of California.

Choice of law clauses are often used in conjunc-tion with a forum selection agreement. Such concurrent use ensures that the selected forum is consistent with the selected law. A selected court thus would not be required to speculate on what law may be applicable to the case and the requirements of such law. A recent example includes the passenger tickets of guests upon the Costa Concordia cruise ship, which capsized off the Italian coast in January 2012. The accident resulted in 32 fatalities and 64 injured passengers. Despite the fact that the victims haled from eight different countries, they were all bound by Section 2 of their tickets which provided as follows:


All claims, controversies, disputes, suits and matters of any kind whatsoever arising out of, concerned with or incident to any voyage that does not depart from, return to, or visit a U.S. port … shall be instituted only in the courts of Genoa, Italy, to the exclusion of the courts of any other country, state or nation. Italian law shall apply to any such proceedings.

This language will most likely serve to prevent successful lawsuits in the United States and other locations where recoveries may be larger than available in Italian courts.



The Application of Foreign Law in American Courts

If an American court determines that it should apply foreign law to the case, how does it know what that law is? At one time, foreign law was required to be proven in court as fact. Today, in the federal courts, that has changed. Courts are free to determine as a matter of law what the foreign law is. The federal courts will follow the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 44.1 states:

A party who intends to raise an issue about a foreign country’s law must give notice by a pleading or other writing. In determining foreign law, the court may consider any relevant material or source, including testimony, whether or not submitted by a party or admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence. The court’s determination must be treated as a ruling on a question of law.

Accordingly, judges may conduct their own research on foreign law, they may request briefs provided by the parties’ lawyers, or they may rely on the testimony of foreign lawyers in or out of court. The following case, Finnish Fur Sales Co., Ltd. v. Juliette Shulof Furs, Inc., involves a U.S. court in New York that had to decide a case under the laws of Finland. It offers an explanation of how a choice of law clause works and shows how a U.S. court applies the law of a foreign country to resolve a contract dispute. Notice the interplay of federal and state law and the application of Rule 44.1.






Finnish Fur Sales Co., Ltd. v. Juliette Shulof Furs, Inc.

770 F. Supp. 139 (1991) United States District Court (S.D.N.Y.)


BACKGROUND AND FACTS

Juliette Shulof Furs (JSF) is a New York corporation that has been in the fur-dealing business for fifteen years. George Shulof, an officer of JSF, attended two auctions conducted by Finnish Fur Sales (FFS) in Finland in 1987. He purchased more than $1.2 million worth of skins at the auctions. Shulof attended each auction and was the actual bidder. The conditions of sale were listed in the auction catalog in English. JSF paid for the majority of the skins purchased, leaving an unpaid balance of $202,416.85. FFS brought this action to recover the contract price of the skins from Shulof, claiming he was personally liable for payment

under Finnish law. Shulof responded that he was acting only as the agent for JSF and that under New York law he was not personally responsible for the contracts of the corporation he represented at the auction.

LEISURE, DISTRICT JUDGE

Section 4 of the Conditions of Sale provides:

Any person bidding at the auction shall stand surety as for his own debt until full payment is made for purchased merchandise. If he has made the bid on behalf of another person, he is jointly and severally liable with the person for the purchase.

continues


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




continued



George Shulof denies any personal liability on the grounds that the provision is unenforceable under both New York and Finnish law.

Section 15 of the Conditions of Sale provides that “[t] hese conditions are governed by Finnish law.” Choice of law clauses are routinely enforced by the courts of this Circuit, “if there is a reasonable basis for the choice.” Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. v. Republic of Palau, 693 F. Supp. 1479, 1494 (S.D.N.Y. 1988). New York courts also generally defer to choice of law clauses if the state or country whose law is thus selected has sufficient contacts with the transaction. Under those circumstances, “New York law requires the court to honor the parties’ choice insofar as matters of substance are concerned, so long as fundamental policies of New York law are not thereby violated.” Woodling v. Garrett Corp., 813 F.2d 543,551 (2d Cir. 1987). Finland’s contacts with the transactions at issue are substantial, rendering the choice of law clause enforceable unless a strong public policy of New York is impaired by the application of Finnish law. Plaintiff FFS is a Finnish resident, which held auctions of Finnish-bred furs in Finland. All bids were made in Finnish marks, with payment and delivery to take place in Finland. Mr. Shulof voluntarily traveled to Finland in order to partake in FFS’s auctions. Thus, virtually all of the significant events related to these transactions took place in Finland. Finland also has an obvious interest in applying its law to events taking place within its borders relating to an important local industry, and in applying uniform law to numerous transactions with bidders from foreign countries.


Mr. Shulof argues that the choice of Finnish law provision should be held invalid … According to Mr. Shulof, New York has the following interests in this action: it is the place of business and of incorporation of JSF; FFS has a representative with a New York office who communicated with Mr. Shulof about the fur auctions; and that New York is, allegedly, “the eco-nomic and design center for the world’s fur industry.” Mr. Shulof also argues that, under New York law. Section 4 of the Conditions of Sale would be invalid as contravening New York’s policy against imposing personal liability on corporate officers …

Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 44.1, a court, “in determining foreign law, may consider any relevant material or source, including testimony.” Both parties have submitted affidavits of Finnish attorneys on the issue of Mr. Shulof’s liability under Finnish law. FFS’s expert, Vesa Majamaa, a Doctor of Law and Professor of the Faculty of Law at the University of Helsinki, gives as his opinion that the provision of Section 4 of the

Conditions of Sale imposing personal liability upon the bidder, regardless of whether he bids on behalf of another, is valid both as a term of the particular auctions at issue and as a general principle of Finnish and Scandinavian auction law. According to Majamaa, it is “commonly accepted in Scandinavia that a bidder, by making a bid, accepts those conditions which have been announced at the auction.” Further, he states: According to the Finnish judicial system, no one may use ignorance of the law as a defense … This same principle is also … applicable when the matter in question concerns … terms of trade … If the buyer is not familiar with the terms observed in an auction, he is obliged to familiarize himself with them. In this respect, failure to inquire will result in a loss for the buyer … If a businessman who has been and is still active in the fields falls back on his ignorance in a case in which he has been offered an actual opportunity to find out about the terms of the auction, his conduct could be considered to be contrary to equitable business practices [and] the “Principle of Good Faith.” …


Majamaa also notes that under Danish law, which he maintains would be applied by a Finnish court in the absence of Finnish decisional or legislative law on point, “It is taken for granted that someone who has bid on merchandise on someone else’s account is responsible for the transaction, as he would be for his own obligation, together with his superior … Hence the auction buyer’s responsibility is not secondary, as is, for example, the responsibility of a guarantor.” …

Majamaa also opines that the terms of Section 4 are neither unexpected nor harsh because “the liability has been clearly presented in the terms of the auction,’ and because the same rule of liability would apply under Finnish law in the absence of any provision.

…[T]he Court concludes that a Finnish court would enforce the provisions of Section 4 and impose personal responsibility upon George Shulof for his auction bids on behalf of JSF.

Moreover, even if a New York court would not enforce such a provision in a transaction to which New York law clearly applied, this Court does not find New York’s interest in protecting one of its residents against personal liability as a corporate officer to constitute so fundamental a policy that New York courts would refuse to enforce a contrary rule of foreign law. Indeed, the New York Court of Appeals has held that “foreign-based rights should be enforced unless the judicial enforcement of such a contract would be the approval of a transaction which is

continues




Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	77




continued


inherently vicious, wicked or immoral, and shocking to	Decision.   Under conflict of law rules, the U.S. court
the prevailing moral sense.” Intercontinental Hotels	applied Finnish law to hold Shulof personally liable for
Corp. v. Golden, 15 N.Y.2d. 9, 13, 254 N.Y.S.2d 527, 529,	the contract debt.
203 N.E.2d 210 (1964). Given the lack of a clear conflict	Case Questions
with  either  New  York  law  or  policy,  this  Court	
concludes that a New York court would apply Finnish	1.	What was the court’s holding with respect to the
law to the issue before the Court. The Court also notes		enforceability of the choice of law clause?
that a similar result has often been reached under New	2.	What factors did the court use in its decision to
York conflict rules even in the absence of a contractual		uphold the choice of law provision?
choice of law clause. Thus, Mr. Shulof must be held	3.	How would you define a “fundamental” public
jointly and severally liable with JSF for any damages		policy  that  would  cause  a  court  to  refuse  to
owed to FFS for the furs purchased.		enforce a choice of law provision?
		


ENFORCEMENT OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS
.......................................................................

At the close of a judicial proceeding, a winning party might obtain a judgment for damages or some other award. Once a judgment is taken against a defendant, it must be enforced. If necessary, it can be done through a legal process, including the seizure of the losing party’s property. But what if a judgment is won in a state or country where that party has no money or property? This is where some good detective work comes in handy. In the United States, judgments taken against a party by a court of competent jurisdic-tion in one state will be enforced by all other states under the Full Faith and Credit Clause of the U.S. Constitution. This provision, however, does not apply to the recognition of judgments from foreign countries. Rather, the issue of whether to recognize a foreign judgment is governed by state law.

Many states have statutes specifically permitting the enforcement of foreign judgments. More than 30 states have adopted either the Uniform Foreign Money Judgments Recognition Act of 1962 or its successor the Uniform Foreign-Country Money Judgments Recogni-tion Act of 2005. The remaining states rely on the requirements of comity in determining whether to recognize a foreign judgment. Regardless of the source of recognition, U.S. courts will usually recognize a final and conclusive foreign money judgment based on a full and fair trial on the merits of the case by an impartial tribunal. The foreign court must have had jurisdiction over the subject matter and over the parties or property involved, and the defendant must have been given notice of the action and an opportunity to appear. Judgments may not be


enforced where they violate due process or public policy, where they were procured by fraud, where the original proceeding contravened a forum selection clause in the contract, where the foreign court was a seriously inconvenient forum, or where there is serious doubt about the integrity of the foreign court.

Foreign courts often enforce judgments of U.S. court on the basis of reciprocity and comity in countries where the losing party or its property can be found. Foreign courts, including several in Europe, have been known to refuse to honor the judgments of U.S. courts where in the view of the foreign court the amount of money awarded was excessive, or repre-sented punitive damages, or where in the opinion of the foreign judge the U.S. court extended its net of jurisdiction too widely. To ensure that U.S. judgments will be enforceable in foreign courts, or foreign judgments enforceable in the United States, it is a good idea for the plaintiff’s counsel here to coordinate with counsel in the foreign country. That way they can develop some reasonable assurance that the proce-dures used to obtain the judgment will satisfy the courts of the country in which property is located or it will otherwise be enforced.

Rules regarding recognition of foreign judgments are similar in other jurisdictions. For example, effective March 1, 2003, a European Union regulation required mutual recognition of court judgments among EU member countries, without requiring any special procedures. Exceptions to recognition and enforcement include judgments in violation of public policies of the state in which enforcement is sought and lack of adequate service of process and notice.

Foreign judgments are subject to review by the intermediate people’s court in China to determine


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




their consistency with treaties to which China is a party and applicable case law. This review is limited to formalities and does not question the foreign court’s findings of fact or application of the law. The court may issue an order of recognition and writ of enforcement unless it determines that the judgment contravenes Chinese law, sovereignty, public security, or social interests. Additional grounds upon which China refuses to recognize foreign judgments include lack of subject matter or personal jurisdiction, lack of notice of the foreign proceeding, and concurrent litigation regarding the same subject matter and issues in China.

The Code of Civil Procedure, adopted in 1908 when India was a British colony, governs recognition of foreign judgments in India. Under Section 44-A of the Code, a party seeking to enforce a foreign judgment must present an Indian district court with a certified copy of the judgment within three years of its entry. The judgment must meet several prerequisites under Section 13 of the Code, including subject matter and personal jurisdiction of the foreign court, a final decision on the merits, the absence of fraud in the procurement of the judgment, and the consistency of the judgment with international law, Indian law, and principles of natural justice. Foreign judgments meeting these conditions are deemed conclusive and binding.

Uniform Foreign Money Claims Act. As a general rule, courts award money judgments in their own currencies. For many years, U.S. courts were only able to award judgments in dollars. This rule was rooted in English law dating back several hundred years. However, it created some problems. If an international contract called for payment in the year 2009 in Japanese yen, and a judgment for a breach of the contract is awarded in 2012 in dollars, fluctuations in currency exchange rates may have distorted the value of the judgment relative to the contract terms. One of the parties may be greatly disadvantaged, while the other may receive a windfall profit. The question of whether or not a foreign money judgment can be awarded is, in the United States, a matter of state law, not federal law. In recent years, about half of the states have enacted the Uniform Foreign Money Claims Act. This statute gives state courts the authority to issue a judgment in a foreign currency. Some state courts have permitted foreign money awards by judicial decision, acknowledging the need to make the parties



whole. Foreign money awards have been available in Great Britain since 1975.

COMMERCIAL DISPUTES WITH NATIONS
.......................................................................

This chapter deals with commercial disputes between private parties. Of course, governments, too, are players in commercial transactions because they are the largest purchasers of goods and services in the world. Resolv-ing disputes with nations is quite a different matter. When governments act in their capacity as a sovereign, it is very difficult to bring them to answer in court. When they act in a commercial capacity, it is easier.

Sovereign Immunity

Sovereignty is defined as the supreme and absolute power that governs an independent state or nation. Of course, in reality, sovereignty can have a range of meanings. For example, in the United States, sover-eignty can be shared between the federal government, the states, and even Native American tribes. In Europe, some national sovereignty had to be sacrificed by countries that joined the European Union. For our purposes, we should recognize that all independent countries are equal with one another and that each has the exclusive right over its citizens, its territory, all property within that territory, and its internal affairs.

It follows that the doctrine of sovereign immunity states that the courts of one country cannot hear cases brought against the government of another country and that courts cannot involve themselves in the internal affairs of a foreign country. In English law this is derived from the feudal notion that the “king can do no wrong.” This principle was firmly established in the United States in Schooner Exchange v. McFaddon, 11 U.S. 116 (1812), in which an American merchant ship was seized by Emperor Napoleon and pressed into service with the French navy. When the ship docked at Philadelphia, its original owners filed suit to have it returned. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that under sovereign immunity, a warship of a foreign nation was not subject to seizure by U.S. courts. Today, sovereign immunity is recognized by most nations of the world and defined by statute in many.

In the United States, the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 defines jurisdiction of U.S. courts over foreign nations. This takes a somewhat



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	79




restrictive view of immunity by creating exceptions courts must consider. These exceptions generally are waiver (by statute or by agreement in a contract); commercial activity; certain violations of international law such as torture, terrorism, and unlawful expropri-ation of private property without payment of com-pensation; and lawsuits for money damages for torts committed within the United States. Examples might include a lawsuit by the victim of state-sponsored terrorism or a lawsuit against a foreign government for negligence in the operation of a motor vehicle within the United States.

Commercial Activity Exception. Sovereign immunity protects foreign governments from suit when they are acting as political entities. When foreign governments or their agencies enter the commercial field, engaging in business for profit, as would a private company, or engaging in essentially private functions, they can be sued in the courts of a foreign country. When agencies of government buy and sell goods or services, they become liable for damages for breach of contract. An example is a contract between a private company in the United States and a government-owned company in China for the supply of raw materials. If the Chinese government is acting as a private company in mining, marketing, and selling raw materials, it is liable to suit in the United States (assuming other jurisdictional requirements are met) for delivering materials that do not conform to the contract specifications.

Abstention Doctrines

There are three abstention doctrines worthy of mention which may impact litigation with a foreign sovereign or relating to an action taken by a foreign sovereign. In each of these circumstances, a U.S. court may refuse to exercise jurisdiction.

Comity. Comity refers to the willingness of one court or department of government to respect the rules or decisions of another or to grant it some privilege or favor. International comity is a judicial doctrine, not an international law, based on the desire for courtesy and reciprocity between countries. It also serves to prevent courts from embroiling themselves in matters of foreign affairs and thereby helps to avoid diplomatic conflicts. Comity allows the courts of one country to recognize the laws and court decrees of another country or to defer hearing a case that is more appropriate for hearing in the courts of another country. Under comity, for example, a court that



otherwise might be entitled to hear a case may allow it to be transferred to a court in a foreign country with a greater interest in the case.

Assume, for example, there is a breach of contract for the sale of goods between two parties, the buyer residing in the United States and the seller in Japan. Assume that the contract does not mention where disputes should be resolved and that jurisdiction in the case would be appropriate in the courts of either country. If the seller files suit for payment in the courts of Japan, and subsequently the buyer (not wanting to defend the case in a foreign country) files suit in a U.S. court alleging damages for defective goods, the U.S. court will likely dismiss the case on the basis of comity to avoid a conflict with the courts of Japan. Now assume that the seller wins a money judgment in Japanese courts, but the buyer has no assets there to satisfy the judgment. The seller can take the judgment to U.S. courts for enforcement. (Keep in mind that U.S. courts will only enforce civil judgments from countries that guarantee fair trials and due process. U.S. courts will not enforce foreign tax liens or verdicts in foreign criminal cases.)

Act of State. The act of state doctrine is a principle of domestic law (not international law) that prohibits the courts of one country from inquiring into the validity of the legislative or executive acts of another country. It was first announced in the United States in the case of Underhill v. Hernandez, 168 U.S. 250 (1897) where it was held that “ … [T]he courts of one country will not sit in judgment on the acts of the government of another done within its own territory. Redress of grievances by reason of such acts must be obtained through the means open to be availed of by sovereign powers as between themselves.”

Many of the U.S. cases discussing the Act of State doctrine involve the confiscation of American-owned property by foreign governments without the payment of compensation, such as occurred with Fidel Castro’s communist takeover of Cuba in 1959 and with the Islamic revolution in Iran in 1979. As a general rule, the Act of State doctrine prohibits courts from embroiling themselves in such politically charged issues. The doctrine is based on the idea that courts should not intervene in matters of foreign affairs. These matters are best left to the executive branch, which has the benefit of a diplomatic corps, foreign embassies, and the ability to talk directly to foreign governments. There is also the practical reason that it may very well be impossible for domestic courts to enforce their decisions against foreign governments, as


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




it certainly would have been in the case of both Cuba and Iran. In the latter case, a treaty between the United States and Iran led to the creation of an impartial tribunal in the Netherlands to resolve outstanding claims between U.S. citizens and the Iranian government. Courts in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, and many other countries recognize the Act of State doctrine.

Political Question Doctrine. The political question doctrine traces its origin to the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1803 opinion in Marbury v. Madison in which Chief Justice Marshall stated “[q]uestions, in their nature political, or which are, by the constitution or laws submitted to the executive, can never be made in this court.” The modern version of this doctrine requires courts to consider six different factors before dismiss-ing a lawsuit on political question grounds. These factors are: (1) constitutional commitment of the question to the executive or legislative branch, (2) a lack of judicially manageable and discoverable stan-dards for resolving the question, (3) the impossibility




of resolving the question without making a policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial determination. (4) the determination of the question will result in the expression of lack of judicial respect for the executive or legislative branches, (5) the need for adherence to a previously-made political decision, and (6) the potential for embarrassment of the U.S. government by differing pronouncements of policy by multiple branches of government.

CONCLUSION
.......................................................................

When negotiating international transactions, the pru-dent businessperson or lawyer will hope for the best but always plan for the worst. Planning for disputes in advance is a proper method of minimizing risk in a transaction. This planning includes obtaining expert legal advice in negotiating and drafting business contracts. The importance of the contract cannot be overstated because if and when a dispute arises, the terms of the contract provide the basis for dispute resolution.




Chapter Summary


1.Alternate dispute resolution usually offers a faster, cheaper, and more efficient alternative to liti-gation. Mediation is a voluntary, non-binding conciliation process. Arbitration is a more for-malized process, resulting in a binding award that courts in many countries will enforce. The parties must agree to arbitration, but once they do, they cannot withdraw. Most commercial nations today have laws permitting arbitration and recognizing arbitral awards.

2.Litigation is the final step in attempting to resolve a dispute. It is in use more frequently in the United States than in virtually any other country. Many litigants from foreign countries seek ways for American courts to hear their cases. American juries are known for giving larger verdicts, and punitive damage awards are possible.

3.Jurisdiction is the power of a court to hear and decide a case. In personam jurisdiction, or “jurisdiction over the person,” refers to the court’s power over a certain individual or corporation. No court can enter a judgment against an


individual or corporate defendant unless they have such jurisdiction. When a defendant is not physically present in the state, a court can obtain jurisdiction only if the party has had sufficient minimum contacts with the territory of the forum such that it is fair for the defendant. The Internet is leading to new jurisdictional issues.

4.Jurisdiction is often confused with the concept of venue. Venue refers to the geographical location of a court of competent jurisdiction where a case can be heard.

5.According to the legal doctrine of forum non conveniens, whenever a case can be properly heard in the courts of more than one jurisdiction, it should be heard in the jurisdiction that is most convenient.

6.The term conflict of laws refers to the rules by which courts determine which state or country’s laws will apply to a case and how to reconcile differences between laws. In breach of contract cases, in the absence of an agreement by the parties, the law of the jurisdiction that has the


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	81




most significant relationship to the transaction and the parties usually governs the contracts. The law of the place where the injury or damage occurred usually governs tort cases, although today many courts are adopting the broader view that the law of the jurisdiction that has the most significant relationship to the tort and to the parties should govern liability.

7.A forum selection clause is a provision in a contract that fixes in advance the jurisdiction in which any disputes will be litigated. A choice of law clause is a contract provision that stipulates which country or jurisdiction’s law will apply in interpreting the contract or enforcing its terms.

8.As a general rule, U.S. courts honor the judgments of foreign countries when the requirements of comity




are satisfied and when the foreign judgment was rendered by an impartial tribunal in a fashion that would not offend American notions of fundamental fairness and due process of law.

9.Foreign courts often enforce judgments of U.S. courts on the basis of reciprocity and comity in countries where the defendant or its property can be found. Some foreign courts have been known to refuse to honor the judgments of U.S. courts where, in the view of the foreign court, the amount of money awarded was excessive.

10.Commercial disputes with foreign sovereigns present many difficulties including barriers to the initiation of litigation. These barriers include sovereign immunity, comity, the act of state doctrine, and the political question doctrine.



Key Terms

alternative dispute resolution	subject matter jurisdiction 62	conflict of laws 72
(ADR) 57	diversity jurisdiction 62	torts 74
mediation 57	in personam jurisdiction 62	choice of law clauses 74
arbitration 57	letter rogatory 68	Full Faith and Credit
arbitration rules 58	venue 68	Clause 77
litigation 61	forum non conveniens 68	sovereign immunity 78
jurisdiction 61	punitive damages 69	act of state doctrine 79
territorial jurisdiction 61	forum selection clause 72	comity 79
in rem jurisdiction 62	diversity of citizenship 72	political question doctrine 80





Questions and Case Problems

1.Explain the concepts of jurisdiction and minimum contacts. What application do they have in international disputes?
2.Sarl Louis Feraud International is a French corporation that designs high-fashion clothing and other items for women. Viewfinder, Inc., a Delaware corporation, operated a Website called “firstView. com,” on which it posted photographs of fashion shows held by designers around the world, including photographs of Feraud’s fashion shows. The firstView Website con-tained both photographs of the current season”s fashions, which could be viewed only upon subscription and payment of a fee, and photographs of past collections, which were available for free. In January 2001, Feraud, along with several other design houses,






filed suit against Viewfinder in the Tribunal de grande instance de Paris seeking money damages for alleged unauthorized use of their intellectual property and unfair competition. Viewfinder failed to respond, and the French court entered a default judgment in which it ordered Viewfinder to remove the offending photo-graphs, and awarded damages of 500,000 francs for each plaintiff and a fine of 50,000 francs for each day Viewfinder failed to comply. In December 2004, Feraud sought recognition of the judgment in U.S. district court in New York. The district court found that enforcing the French judgment would be repugnant to New York public policy because it would violate Viewfinder’s First Amendment rights. The district court concluded that the “First Amendment simply does not permit plaintiffs


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business




to stage public events in which the general public has a considerable interest, and then control the way in which information about those events is disseminated in the mass media.” Feraud filed an appeal in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. What should be the outcome on appeal? Sarl Louis Feraud International v. Viewfinder, Inc., 489 F.3d 474 (2d Cir. 2007).

3.Two teenagers residing in North Carolina were fatally injured when the bus upon which they were riding overturned on a roadway outside of Paris, France. The parents of the decedents brought a lawsuit in North Carolina state court against Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company and its subsidiaries based in Luxembourg, Turkey and France alleging that the accident was caused by negligent design and production of the bus tires. The subsidiaries moved to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. The plaintiffs alleged that North Carolina courts had personal jurisdiction due to the fact that the subsidiaries placed their tires into the stream of commerce and some of these tires ended up in North Carolina. The subsidiaries alleged that there was no personal jurisdiction as the mere placement of a product in the stream of commerce is an insufficient basis for the assertion of personal jurisdiction especially when the accident had no connection with the forum other than the residence of the decedents. Additionally, the mere placement of tires into the stream of commerce did not constitute a continuous and systematic presence in North Carolina as to subject the subsidiaries to personal jurisdiction. The North Carolina state courts disagreed and exercised personal jurisdiction over the subsidiaries. The subsidiaries appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. Do the North Carolina courts have personal jurisdiction over Goodyear’s foreign subsidiaries arising from the accident in France? Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S.A. v. Brown, 131 S. Ct. 2846 (2011).

4.Nicastro was severely injured at his workplace in New Jersey by an industrial metal shearing machine manu-factured by J. McIntyre Machinery, Ltd., an English company. Nicastro filed a product liability claim against McIntyre in New Jersey state court. McIntyre denied that the New Jersey state courts had personal jurisdic-tion. The machinery in question was manufactured in England and was not directly sold to Nicastro’s employer in New Jersey. McIntyre had no office, did not pay taxes, own property, advertise, or maintain employees in New Jersey. Although McIntyre had a U.S. distributor for its products and sent its employees to the United States to attend trade shows, its only contact with New Jersey was the presence of the metal shearing machine at Nicastro’s workplace. The New Jersey



Supreme Court disagreed with McIntyre’s contentions and held that state courts could exercise personal jurisdiction with respect to Nicastro’s claim. McIntyre appealed this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court. Do the New Jersey courts have personal jurisdiction over McIntyre arising from Nicastro’s injuries? J. McIntyre Machinery, Ltd. v. Nicastro, 131 S. Ct. 2780 (2011).

5.Why do so many litigants, “like moths to a flame,” want to litigate in the United States?

6.Seung was a passenger on the M/S Paul Gauguin cruise ship owned by Regent Seven Seas Cruises. The cruise ship operated exclusively in French Polynesia. Seung’s ticket contained a forum selection clause that designated Paris, France as the sole location for any lawsuit that might be filed arising from passenger injuries on cruises that did not include a U.S. port. Seung was injured on her cruise and filed a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Florida. Regent Seven Seas Cruises moved to dismiss the lawsuit on the basis of the forum selection clause. Seung claimed that the clause violated U.S. public policy, was unfair and unreasonable as she was financially and medically unable to bring a lawsuit in Paris, and that Paris was a “remote alien forum” designated for the sole purpose of discouraging passengers from bringing legitimate claims. The district court disagreed with Seung and dismissed her lawsuit. Seung appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. Is the forum selection clause as drafted enforceable against Seung such as to bar her lawsuit in the United States? Why or why not? Seung v. Regent Seven Seas Cruises, Inc., 2010 U.S. App. LEXIS 17449 (11th Cir. 2010).

7.The Uniform Foreign Money Judgments Recognition Act of 1962 and the Uniform Foreign-Country Money Judgments Recognition Act of 2005 do not mention any requirement of reciprocity. However, several states will not recognize foreign judgments without assurance that judgments entered in their courts will be enforced overseas. Criticism of such a requirement has focused on the absence of reciprocity in English common law and U.S. statutes and common law, the holding of the interests of private litigants hostage to the government’s interest in promoting reciprocity, and the gridlock that results as the United States and foreign states refuse to recognize one another’s judgments due to failure to reciprocate. Should recognition of foreign judgments in U.S. state courts be subject to a reciprocity requirement? Why or why not?

8.In 1995, Jorge Luis Machuca Gonzalez purchased a Chrysler LHS in Mexico. In May 1996, Gonzalez’s wife was involved in a collision with another moving vehicle


Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3: Resolving International Commercial Disputes	83




while driving the Chrysler LHS in Mexico. The accident triggered the passenger-side air bag. The force of the air bag’s deployment instantaneously killed Gonzalez’s three- year-old son, Pablo. Gonzalez brought suit in Texas district court against Chrysler, TRW, Inc., and TRW Vehicle Safety Systems, Inc. (the designers of the front sensor for the air bag), and Morton International, Inc. (the designer of the air bag module). Gonzalez asserted claims based on products liability, negligence, gross negligence, and breach of warranty. The district court dismissed the case on the basis of forum non conveniens as the car was manufactured, purchased, and operated in Mexico, and the accident involved Mexican citizens. On appeal, Gonzalez claimed that Mexico was an inadequate forum because Mexican law capped the maximum award for the loss of a child’s life at approximately $2,500. Does the enormous disparity between what Gonzales could recover for the death of his son in the United States and Mexico render Mexico an inadequate forum? What did the court of appeals decide? Gonzales v. Chrysler Corp., 301 F.3d 377 (5th Cir. 2002).

9.Badbusinessbureau.com was a limited liability company organized and existing under the laws of St. Kitts/Nevis, West Indies. Badbusinessbureau owned and operated




“The Rip-Off Report,” a Website displaying consumer complaints about various businesses, including 30 or 40 complaints about Hy Cite Corporation, a Wisconsin-based marketer of dinnerware, glassware, and cookware. Badbusinessbureau did not have any assets, offices, or employees in Wisconsin. No Wisconsin company had purchased a rebuttal to a consumer complaint or ad space on the site or had enrolled in the company’s “Corporate Consumer Advocacy Program.” However, the Website was viewable in Wisconsin, and one Wisconsin resident purchased a copy of “The Rip Off Revenge Guide” through a link on the site. Hy Cite filed suit and contended that by operating the Website, Badbusinessbureau had engaged in unfair competition, false advertising, disparagement, and trademark in-fringement. Badbusinessbureau filed a motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. How should the district court resolve this motion? What challenges does the Internet present in the area of personal jurisdiction? Should the rules regarding personal jurisdiction be different for Web-based businesses and transactions? Why or why not? Hy Cite Corp. v. Badbusinessbureau.com L.L.C., 297 F. Supp.2d 1154 (W.D. Wisc. 2004).



Managerial Implications

1.You are CEO of a large publicly traded company. You are negotiating several contracts with foreign govern-ments in Vietnam, India, and Brazil to provide hardware and software to government agencies. Are you interested in including an arbitration clause in the contract? What are the pluses and minuses of such a clause? What alternatives do you have? How does your plan change, if at all, if you are dealing with multiple corporations in the same countries? What if you are dealing with one corporation in the United Kingdom and one in New York? Discuss how these variables may affect your decision.

2.You have started a small high-tech company in New York.

a.You are running an informational Website. Custo-mers must call your 800 number to place an order. A customer in Alaska is very unhappy with your product. Can he or she successfully sue you in Alaska?
b.You decide you want to be clear in all your future dealings, so you insert a forum selection clause in all of your contracts with your customers that stipulates





arbitration in New York under the rules of the American Arbitration Association. Would this be enforceable?

c.What if the forum selection clause stated that all disputes would be heard in Tibet?

d.What ramifications are there to changing your Website and making it more interactive so that people can place orders there?
e.What if your competitor is using your trade secrets and your patents without your permission or payment? Would you be interested in arbitrating this dispute? Explain.
f.What difference would it make if your competitor were a Dutch company?

g.The CEO has asked you to outline a comprehen-sive strategy to deal with customers, suppliers, and citizen groups complaining about a myriad of issues as well as employee complaints (both domestic and foreign). Prepare a short memo addressing key principles, major concerns, and suggested actions.



Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84Part 1: The Legal Environment of International Business







Ethical Considerations

The Bhopal disaster litigation presented the anomaly of Indian plaintiffs seeking to maintain their lawsuit in the United States on the basis of the inadequacy of the Indian legal system while, at the same time, a U.S. company sought to have the case heard in India. Union Carbide was ultimately successful in having the U.S. case dismissed in favor of litigation in India. Although the subsequent $470 million settlement sounds very large, the ultimate breakdown was approximately $600 for each injured person and $3,000 for each fatality. Union Carbide’s legal strategy of forcing the litigation to proceed in India where it could be settled for much less than a U.S. jury may have awarded was very successful.

But was it ethical? The answer may depend on the ethical theory one applies to the question. For example, teleological frameworks focusing on the consequences of one’s actions lead to mixed results. One such framework, ethical egoism, recognizes that people act in their own self-interest and thus a person should act in a manner that best promotes his or her interests unless the net result will generate negative rather than positive results. Union Carbide clearly acted in its own self-interest in forcing the litigation to India, but the net result was a significant financial undervaluation of the victims’ lives. Another theory within the teleological framework is moral relativism, which focuses on determining what is right behavior based on the time and place of the circumstances. Were the terms of the settlement proper given the location of the catastrophe and the financial circum-stances of the largely poor and undereducated victims of the gas leak? Finally, utilitarianism focuses on whether an individual’s action adds to the overall utility of the community. Ethical conduct is that which is likely to produce the greatest overall good not just for the decider but for all persons who will be affected by the decision. The financial well-being of the victims








may have been enhanced had the litigation been permitted to proceed in the United States, although it is equally possible that this wellbeing would have been diminished by procedural delays and appeals. How-ever, if one determines that the greater good resides with those interested in the continued financial well-being of Union Carbide, then the outcome was ethically defensible.

By contrast, deontological frameworks focus on duties rather than outcomes. For example, Immanuel Kant’s Categorical Imperative provides that “[o]ne ought to act such that the principle of one’s act could become a universal law of human action in a world in which one would hope to live” and that “[o]ne ought to treat others as having intrinsic value in themselves, and not merely as a means to achieve an end.” Would anyone want Union Carbide’s conduct in the Bhopal disaster litigation to become an example for compa-nies confronted with similar catastrophes in the future? Was the settlement simply a means of preserving the company’s assets and shareholder value at the victims’ expense?


The theory of contractarianism holds that mem-bership in society is imbued with certain duties and responsibilities and that rational people will always select the course of action that is the fairest and most equitable resolution of a dilemma without regard for personal consequences. Did Union Carbide abide by its duties and responsibilities to the community in Bhopal, especially given the lethal nature of the products it was producing and the large information gap between itself and the people living close to the plant? Did Union Carbide choose the fairest and most equitable resolution of the litigation without regard for consequences? As a profit-driven entity, should it have made such a choice? Is contractarianism unrealistic given that inequality is a fact of life?

What conclusions do you reach and why?














Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).

Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
